<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY Ghbarb CDATA "Gh" -- Gh with bar below -->
<!ENTITY ghbarb CDATA "gh" -- gh with bar below -->
<!ENTITY KHbarb CDATA "KH" -- KH with bar below -->
<!ENTITY Khbarb CDATA "Kh" -- Kh with bar below -->
<!ENTITY khbarb CDATA "kh" -- kh with bar below -->
<!ENTITY Shbarb CDATA "Sh" -- Sh with bar below -->
<!ENTITY shbarb CDATA "sh" -- sh with bar below -->
<!ENTITY Zhbarb CDATA "Zh" -- Zh with bar below -->
<!ENTITY zhbarb CDATA "zh" -- zh with bar below -->

<!ENTITY Kbarb CDATA "K" -- K with bar below -->
<!ENTITY kbarb CDATA "k" -- k with bar below -->

<!ENTITY sumlb CDATA "s" -- s with umlaut below -->
<!ENTITY Sumlb CDATA "S" -- S with umlaut below -->
<!ENTITY tumlb CDATA "t" -- t with umlaut below -->
<!ENTITY Tumlb CDATA "T" -- T with umlaut below -->
<!ENTITY zumlb CDATA "z" -- z with umlaut below -->
<!ENTITY Zumlb CDATA "Z" -- Z with umlaut below -->

<!ENTITY adotb CDATA "a" -- a with dot below -->
<!ENTITY Adotb CDATA "A" -- A with dot below -->
<!ENTITY ddotb CDATA "d" -- d with dot below -->
<!ENTITY Ddotb CDATA "D" -- D with dot below -->
<!ENTITY hdotb CDATA "h" -- h with dot below -->
<!ENTITY Hdotb CDATA "H" -- H with dot below -->
<!ENTITY kdotb CDATA "k" -- k with dot below -->
<!ENTITY Kdotb CDATA "K" -- K with dot below -->
<!ENTITY mdotb CDATA "m" -- m with dot below -->
<!ENTITY Mdotb CDATA "M" -- M with dot below -->
<!ENTITY ndotb CDATA "n" -- n with dot below -->
<!ENTITY Ndotb CDATA "N" -- N with dot below -->
<!ENTITY tdotb CDATA "t" -- t with dot below -->
<!ENTITY Tdotb CDATA "T" -- T with dot below -->
<!ENTITY rdotb CDATA "r" -- r with dot below -->
<!ENTITY Rdotb CDATA "R" -- R with dot below -->
<!ENTITY sdotb CDATA "s" -- s with dot below -->
<!ENTITY Sdotb CDATA "S" -- S with dot below -->
<!ENTITY zdotb CDATA "z" -- z with dot below -->
<!ENTITY Zdotb CDATA "Z" -- Z with dot below -->

<!ENTITY adota CDATA "a" -- a with dot above -->
<!ENTITY Adota CDATA "A" -- A with dot above -->
<!ENTITY ndota CDATA "n" -- n with dot above -->
<!ENTITY Ndota CDATA "N" -- N with dot above -->
<!ENTITY sdota CDATA "s" -- s with dot above -->
<!ENTITY Sdota CDATA "S" -- S with dot above -->

<!ENTITY nbarb CDATA "n" -- n with bar below -->
<!ENTITY Nbarb CDATA "N" -- N with bar below -->
<!ENTITY zbarb CDATA "z" -- z with bar below -->
<!ENTITY Zbarb CDATA "Z" -- Z with bar below -->

<!ENTITY hamza CDATA  "'"  -- Hamza -->
<!ENTITY ayin CDATA   "`"  -- Ayin -->

]><TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
<fileDesc>
<titleStmt>
<title>The T&umacr;zuk-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;, Or: Memoirs of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, volume 1 of 2</title>
<author key="Jahangir, Emperor of Hindustan" ref="https://viaf.org/viaf/38320916">Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r (1569&ndash;1627)</author>
<respStmt><resp>Translator</resp> <name key="Rogers, Alexander" ref="https://viaf.org/viaf/15169887">Alexander Rogers (1825&ndash;1911)</name></respStmt>
<respStmt><resp>Editor</resp> <name key="Beveridge, Henry" ref="https://viaf.org/viaf/42076979">Henry Beveridge (1837&ndash;1929)</name></respStmt>
<respStmt><resp>Transcription</resp> <name>Jeroen Hellingman</name></respStmt>
</titleStmt>
<publicationStmt>
<publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
<pubPlace>Urbana, Illinois, USA.</pubPlace>
<idno type=LCCN>#####</idno>
<idno type=OLN>OL22895796M</idno>
<idno type=OLW>OL371088W</idno>
<idno type=OCLC>2696773</idno>
<idno type=PGSrc>53674-53716-Jahangir-Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri</idno>
<idno type=PGclearance>20070331064334roger</idno>
<idno type=PGDPProjectId>projectID4611601ee654e</idno>
<idno type=epub-id>urn:uuid:a18e69b5-256e-4f47-acfb-059d45afaca2</idno>
<idno type=PGnum>53674</idno>
<date>2016-12-06</date>
<availability>
<p>&availability.en;

<p>This eBook is produced by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at <xref url="http://www.pgdp.net/">www.pgdp.net</xref>.

<p>This is volume one of a two-volume set; volume two is available from Project Gutenberg as ebook <xref url="pg:53716">53716</xref>.

<p>Scans for this book are available on-line from the Internet Archive (copy <xref url="https://archive.org/details/tuzukijahangirio00jahauoft">1</xref>).

<p>An alternative edition is available from <xref url="http://persian.packhum.org/persian/pf?file=11001080&amp;ct=0">The Packard Humanities Institute</xref>.

<!-- Checked KWIC up to letter C -->

</availability>
</publicationStmt>
<notesStmt>
    <note type="Description">#####<!--A short description of this document.--></note>
    <note type="Blurb">#####<!--Blurb for on the flap.--></note>
    <note type="Extract">#####<!--Short extract from the text.--></note>
</notesStmt>
<sourceDesc>
<bibl>
<author>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r</author>
<title>The T&umacr;zuk-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;, Or: Memoirs of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r</title>
<date>1909</date>
</bibl>
</sourceDesc>
</fileDesc>
<encodingDesc>
<p>The various quote-like symbols have been encoded as follows:

<table>
<row role=label><cell>Encoding <cell>Appearance <cell>Meaning

<row><cell>&amp;lsquo; <cell rend="font-size(xx-large)">&lsquo;    <cell>Left single quote.
<row><cell>&amp;rsquo; <cell rend="font-size(xx-large)">&rsquo;    <cell>Right single quote.
<row><cell>&amp;apos;  <cell rend="font-size(xx-large)">&apos;     <cell>Apostrophe.
<row><cell>&amp;prime; <cell rend="font-size(xx-large)">&prime;    <cell>Single prime.
<row><cell>&amp;hamza; <cell rend="font-size(xx-large)">&hamza;    <cell>Representation of the Arabic letter hamza.
<row><cell>&amp;ayin;  <cell rend="font-size(xx-large)">&ayin;     <cell>Representation of the Arabic letter ayin.
</table>

</encodingDesc>
<profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
        <language id=en>English</language>
        <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
        <language id=en-UK>English (United Kingdom)</language>
        <language id=de>German</language>
        <language id=fr>French</language>
        <language id=la>Latin</language>
        <language id=ar>Arabic</language>
        <language id=hi>Hindi</language>
        <language id=grc>Greek</language>
        <language id=grc-Latn>Greek (Latin transcription)</language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
        <keywords>
            <list>
                <item>India -- History 1526-1765</item>
                <item>Mogul Empire</item>
                <item>Jahangir, -- Emperor of Hindustan, -- 1569-1627</item>
                <item>India -- Kings and rulers -- Biography</item>
            </list>
        </keywords>
    </textClass>
</profileDesc>
<revisionDesc>
    <list>
        <item>2011-10-08 Started.
    </list>
</revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text rend="stylesheet(style/classic.css)">
<front id=frontmatter>
<div1 id=cover type=Cover>


<p><figure id=cover-image rend="image(images/new-cover.jpg)"> 
<figDesc>Newly Designed Front Cover.</figDesc> 
</figure>


<div1 id=frontis type=Frontispiece>


<p><figure id=frontispiece> 
<figDesc>Jahangir</figDesc>

<p>Reproduced from a Miniature in the British Museum
<lb>(MS. Add. 22.282. fol. 2) 
</figure>



<pb>
<titlePage>
<docTitle><titlePart>The
<lb>T&umacr;zuk-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;</titlePart>

<titlePart type=sub>Or
<lb>Memoirs of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r</titlePart></docTitle>

<byline><hi>Translated by</hi>
<lb><docAuthor>Alexander Rogers</docAuthor>
<lb>I.C.S. (Retired)

<lb><hi>Edited by</hi>
<lb><docAuthor>Henry Beveridge</docAuthor>
<lb>I.C.S. (Retired)
</byline>
</titlePage>




<pb n=vii>
<div1 id=preface type=Preface>
<head>Preface.</head>


<p>Mr. Rogers translated the Memoirs of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r several years ago from the edition which Sayyid A&hdotb;mad printed at Ghazipur in 1863 and at Allyghur in 1864. Orientalists are greatly indebted to the Sayyid for his disinterested labours, but his text seems to have been made from a single and defective MS. and is often incorrect, especially in the case of proper names. I have collated it with the excellent MSS. in the India Office and the British Museum, and have thus been able to make numerous corrections. I have also consulted the MS. in the Library of the R.A.S., but it is not a good one. I have, with Mr. Rogers&apos;s permission, revised the translation, and I have added many notes.

<p>There is an account of the Memoirs in the sixth volume of Elliot &amp; Dowson&apos;s &ldquo;History of India,&rdquo; and there the subject of the various recensions is discussed. There is also a valuable note by Dr. Rieu in his &ldquo;Catalogue of Persian MSS.,&rdquo; i, 253. It is there pointed out that there is a manuscript translation of the first nine years of the Memoirs by William Erskine in the British Museum. I have consulted this translation and found it helpful. The MS. is numbered Add. 26,611. The translation is, of course, excellent, and it was made from a good MS.

<p>A translation of what Dr. Rieu calls the garbled Memoirs of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was made by Major David Price and published by the Oriental Translation Committee of the Royal Asiatic Society in 1829. The author of this work is unknown, and its history is an unsolved problem. It is occasionally fuller than the genuine Memoirs, and it contains some picturesque touches, such as the account <pb n=viii>of Akbar&apos;s deathbed. But it is certain that it is, in part at least, a fabrication, and that it contains statements which Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r could never have made. Compare, for instance, the account of the death of Sohr&amacr;b, the son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam, near the end of Price&apos;s translation, pp. 138&ndash;9, with that given in the genuine Memoirs in the narrative of the fifteenth year of the reign, p. 293, and also in the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 139. Besides being inaccurate, the garbled or spurious Memoirs are much shorter than the genuine work, and do not go beyond the fifteenth year. Price&apos;s translation, too, was made from a single and badly written MS.<note n=1>It is owing to the crabbed writing of Price&apos;s MS. that at p. 21 Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r is made to say that the Prince of Kashmir belonged to the society of Jog&imacr;s. The real statement is that the prince belonged to the Chak family.</note> which is now in the R.A.S. library. Dr. Rieu remarks that it is to be regretted that so poor a fabrication as the garbled Memoirs should have been given to the world as a genuine production of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r. This being so, it is appropriate that the present translation of the genuine Memoirs should be published by the Royal Asiatic Society.

<p>When Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r had written his Memoirs for the first twelve years of his reign he made them into a volume, and had a number of copies made and distributed (Elliot, vi, 360). The first of these he gave to &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, who was then in high favour. The present publication is a translation of the first volume of the Memoirs, but the translation of the whole Memoirs, together with the additions of Mu&ayin;tamad &Khbarb;&amacr;n and Mu&hdotb;ammad H&amacr;d&imacr;, has been completed, and it is to be hoped that its publication will follow in due course.

<p>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r reigned for twenty-two years, but ill-health and sorrow made him give up the writing of his Memoirs in the seventeenth year of his reign (see Elliot, vi, 280). He then entrusted the task to Mu&ayin;tamad &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the author <pb n=ix>of the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, who continued the Memoirs to the beginning of the nineteenth year. He then dropped writing the Memoirs in the name of the emperor, but he continued the narrative of the reign, to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s death, in his own work, the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma. Mu&hdotb;ammad H&amacr;d&imacr; afterwards continued the Memoirs down to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s death, but his work is little more than an abridgment of the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma. Sayyid A&hdotb;mad&apos;s edition contains the continuations of the Memoirs by Mu&ayin;tamad and Mu&hdotb;ammad H&amacr;d&imacr;, and also Mu&hdotb;ammad H&amacr;d&imacr;&apos;s preface and introduction. But this preface and introduction have not been translated by Mr. Rogers, and I do not think that a translation is necessary. Mu&hdotb;ammad H&amacr;d&imacr; is a late writer (see Elliot, vi, 392), his date being the first quarter of the eighteenth century, and his introduction seems to be almost wholly derived from the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; of K&amacr;mg&amacr;r &Hdotb;usain&imacr; (Elliot, vi, 257). It consists mainly of an account of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s life from his birth up to his accession.

<p>It is perhaps unnecessary to say anything about the importance of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s Memoirs. They give a lively picture of India in the early decades of the seventeenth century, and are a valuable supplement to the Akbar-n&amacr;ma. I may be allowed, however, to end this preface with the following remarks which I contributed to the <hi>Indian Magazine</hi> for May, 1907:&mdash;

<p>&ldquo;The Royal authors of the East had more blood in them than those kings whose works have been catalogued by Horace Walpole. To find a parallel to them we must go back to Julius Cæsar, and even then the advantage is not upon the side of Europe. After all, the commentaries of the famous Roman are a little disappointing, and certainly the Memoirs of B&amacr;bar and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r are far more human and fuller of matter than the story of the Gallic Wars. All Muhammadans have a fancy for writing chronicles and autobiographies, and several Muhammadan <pb n=x>kings have yielded to the common impulse. Central Asia has given us the Memoirs of Tamarlane, B&amacr;bar, and &Hdotb;aidar, and the chronicle of Abu-l-ghazi; Persia has given us the Memoirs of Shah Tahmasp, and India the Memoirs of the Princess Gulbadan and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r. In modern times we see the same impulse at work, for we have the biography of the late Ameer of Afghanistan and the diary of the Shah of Persia.

<p>&ldquo;The contributions to literature by Royal authors which come to us from the East form a department by themselves, and one which is of great value. Nearly all Eastern histories are disfigured by adulation. Even when the author has had no special reason for flattery and for suppression of truth, he has been dazzled by the greatness of his subject, and gives us a picture which no more reveals the real king than does a telescope the real constitution of the Morning Star. But when Eastern monarchs give us chronicles, the case is different. They have no occasion for fear or favour, and mercilessly expose the failings of their contemporaries. Not that they are to be trusted any more than other Orientals when speaking of themselves. B&amacr;bar has suppressed the story of his vassalage to Shah Isma&ayin;&imacr;l, of his defeat at Ghajdaw&amacr;n, and his treatment of &ayin;&Amacr;lam Lodi; and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r has glossed over his rebellion against his father, and the circumstances of Sh&imacr;r-&amacr;fgan&apos;s death. But when they have to speak of others&mdash;whether kings or nobles&mdash;they give us the whole truth, and perhaps a little more. An amiable Princess like Gulbadan Begam may veil the faults and weaknesses of her brothers Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n and Hind&amacr;l; but B&amacr;bar strips the gilt off nearly every one whom he mentions, and spares no one&mdash;not even his own father.

<p>&ldquo;The Memoirs of B&amacr;bar, &Hdotb;aidar, and Gulbadan have been translated into English, and those of &Tumlb;ahmasp have been translated into German; but unfortunately Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s <pb n=xi>have never been fully translated,<note n=1>A translation was begun by the Rev. Mr. Lowe for the Asiatic Society of Bengal, but only one fasciculus was published. This was in 1889.</note> though there are extracts in Elliot &amp; Dowson&apos;s History, and Major Price many years ago gave us from an imperfect manuscript a garbled account of a few years of his Memoirs. Yet in reality Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s Memoirs are not inferior in interest to those of B&amacr;bar. Indeed, we may go further and say there is twice as much matter in them as in B&amacr;bar&apos;s Memoirs, and that they are by far the most entertaining of the two works. Not that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was by any means as remarkable a man as his great-grandfather. He was a most faulty human being, and his own account of himself often excites our disgust and contempt. But he had the sense not to confine his narrative to an account of himself, and he has given us a picture of his father, the great Akbar, which is a bigger &lsquo;plum&rsquo; than anything in B&amacr;bar&apos;s Memoirs. But his account of himself has also its charm, for it reveals the real man, and so he lives for us in his Memoirs just as James VI&mdash;to whom, and to the Emperor Claudius, he bears a strange and even ludicrous resemblance&mdash;lives in the &lsquo;Fortunes of Nigel&rsquo; or Claudius in Suetonius and Tacitus. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was indeed a strange mixture. The man who could stand by and see men flayed alive, and who, as he himself tells us, put one man to death and had two others hamstrung because they showed themselves inopportunely and frightened away his game, could yet be a lover of justice and could spend his Thursday evenings in holding high converse. He could quote F&imacr;rd&umacr;si&apos;s verse against cruelty to animals&mdash;


<lg type=Group>
    <l>&lsquo;Ah! spare yon emmet, rich in hoarded grain&mdash;
    <l>He lives with pleasure, and he dies with pain&rsquo;;
</lg>


<p>and be soft-hearted enough to wish that his father were alive to share with him the delicious mangoes of India. He could procure the murder of Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l and avow <pb n=xii>the fact without remorse, and also pity the royal elephants because they shivered in winter when they sprinkled themselves with cold water. &lsquo;I observed this,&rsquo; he says, &lsquo;and so I ordered that the water should be heated to the temperature of luke-warm milk.&rsquo; And he adds: &lsquo;This was entirely my own idea; nobody had ever thought of it before.&rsquo; One good trait in Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was his hearty enjoyment of Nature and his love for flowers. B&amacr;bar had this also, but he was old, or at least worn out, when he came to India, and he was disgusted by an Indian attempt to poison him, and so his description of India is meagre and splenetic. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, on the other hand, is a true Indian, and dwells delightedly on the charms of Indian flowers, particularises the pal&amacr;s, the bok&umacr;l, and the champa, and avows that no fruit of Afghanistan or Central Asia is equal to the mango. He loved, too, to converse with pandits and Hindu ascetics, though he is contemptuous of their avatars, and causes the image of Vishnu as the boar avatar to be broken and flung into the Pushkar lake.

<p>&ldquo;It is a remark of Hallam&apos;s that the best attribute of Muhammadan princes is a rigorous justice in chastising the offences of others. Of this quality Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, in spite of all his weaknesses, had a large share, and even to this day he is spoken of with respect by Muhammadans on account of his love of justice. It is a pathetic circumstance that it was this princely quality which was to some extent the cause of the great affront put upon him by Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n. Many complaints had been made to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r of the oppressions of Mah&amacr;bat in Bengal, and crowds of suppliants had come to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s camp. It was his desire to give them redress and to punish Mah&amacr;bat for his exactions, together with his physical and mental weakness, which led to his capture on the banks of the Jhilam.

<p>&ldquo;One of the many interesting observations in his Memoirs <pb n=xiii>is his account of an inscription he saw at Hindaun. He says that in the thirteenth year of his reign, as he was marching back to Agra, he found a verse by someone inscribed on the pillar of a pleasure-house on an islet in the lake at Hindaun. He then proceeds to quote it, and it turns out to be one of Omar Khayyam&apos;s! This is FitzGerald&apos;s paraphrase:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&lsquo;For some we loved, the loveliest and the best
      <l rend="indent(2)">That from his vintage Time hath prest,
    <l>Have drunk their Cup a Round or two before,
      <l rend="indent(2)">And one by one crept silently to rest.&rsquo;
</lg>


<p>&ldquo;The same quatrain has also been quoted by Baday&umacr;n&imacr; in his history, and the interesting thing about Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s quotation of it is that he could see the beauty of the verse and at the same time did not know who was the author. There is also an interest in the fact that the third line contains a different reading from that given in Whinfield&apos;s edition of the text. Hindaun is in the Jaipur territory, and one would like to know if the inscription still exists.

<p>&ldquo;Among other things in Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s Memoirs there is the description of the outbreak of the Plague, given to him by a lady of his court [which has been quoted by Dr. Simpson in his book upon Plague], and there is a very full account of Kashmir, which is considerably superior to that in the &Amacr;y&imacr;n Akbar&imacr;, which Sir Walter Lawrence has praised.&rdquo;

<p>With reference to the portrait of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r prefixed to this volume, it may be interesting to note that it appears from Mr. E. B. Havell&apos;s &ldquo;Indian Sculpture,&rdquo; p. 203, that the British Museum possesses a drawing by Rembrandt which was copied from a Moghul miniature, and which has been pronounced by Mr. Rouffaer to be a portrait of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r. Coryat (Purchas, reprint, iv, 473) thus describes Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s personal appearance:&mdash;&ldquo;He is fifty and three years of age, his nativity-day having been celebrated with wonderful pomp since my arrival here. On that day he weighed himself in a pair of golden scales, which by great <pb n=xiv>chance I saw the same day; a custom he observes most inviolably every year. He is of complexion neither white nor black, but of a middle betwixt them. I know not how to express it with a more expressive and significant epitheton than olive. An olive colour his face presenteth. He is of a seemly composition of body, of a stature little unequal (as I guess not without grounds of probability) to mine, but much more corpulent than myself.&rdquo;

<p>As regards the bibliography of the T&umacr;zuk-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;, I have to note that there is an Urdu translation by <corr sic=Munshi>Munsh&imacr;</corr> A&hdotb;mad &ayin;Al&imacr; S&imacr;m&amacr;b of R&amacr;mp&umacr;ra, that is, Aligarh in Tonk. It was made from Mu&hdotb;ammad H&amacr;d&imacr;&apos;s edition under the patronage of Mu&hdotb;ammad Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Naw&amacr;b of Tonk, and was published by Newal Kishor in 1291 (1874). There is also a Hindi translation by Munsh&imacr; Deb&imacr; Pras&amacr;d which was published in 1905 at Calcutta by the Bh&amacr;rat Mitra Press. The Urdu translation referred to by Mr. Blumhardt in his Catalogue of Hindustani MSS., p. 61, and noticed by Elliot, vi, 401, and Garcin de Tassy, iii, 301, is, as the two latter writers have remarked, a translation of the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma. The MS. referred to by Elliot vi, 277, as having been in the possession of General Thomas Paterson Smith, and which is described in Ethé&apos;s Catalogue of the India Office MSS., No. 2833, p. 1533, was made by Sayyid Mu&hdotb;ammad, the elder brother of Sayyid A&hdotb;mad. <corr sic=As>At</corr> the end of the MS. the copyist gives some account of himself and of his family. He made the copy from copies in the Royal Library and in the possession of Rajah Rogh&umacr; N&amacr;th Singh <hi>alias</hi> L&amacr;l Singh J&amacr;lp&umacr;r. He finished it in October, 1843. Sayyid Mu&hdotb;ammad was Munsif of Hutg&amacr;m in the Fat&hdotb;p&umacr;r district. He died young in 1845. My friend Mr. T. W. Arnold, of the India Office, informs me that Sayyid A&hdotb;mad told him that he found a valuable illustrated MS of the T&umacr;zuk in the débris of the Delhi Royal Library, and took it home, but that it was lost when his house was plundered <pb n=xv>by the mutineers. There is in the Bodleian a copy in Sayyid A&hdotb;mad&apos;s own handwriting. He states that he made use of ten good MSS. The Englishman at whose request he made the copy was John Panton Gubbins, who was once Sessions Judge of Delhi. This copy is described in the Bodleian Catalogue, p. 117, No. 221. The MS. No. 220 described on the same page was brought home by Fraser, and is a good one, but only goes down to the end of the 14th year.


<p rend="class(signed)"><hi rend=sc>H. Beveridge.</hi>

<p rend="class(signed)"><hi>March, 1909.</hi>


<milestone unit=tb>

<p><hi rend=sc>Postscript.</hi>&mdash;Since writing this Preface I have been enabled by the kindness of Mr. Irvine to examine the Hindi Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r-n&amacr;ma of Deb&imacr; Pras&amacr;d. It is not a translation, but an abstract, and I do not think it is of much value. Being a Jodhp&umacr;r man he has been able, perhaps, to correct some spellings of places, but he does not seem to have consulted any MSS., and when he comes to a difficulty he shirks it. The most valuable adjunct to the T&umacr;zuk, after the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, is the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; of K&amacr;mg&amacr;r &Hdotb;usain&imacr;. It is important as giving the early history of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, that is, of the time when he was Prince Sel&imacr;m. There are three copies of his work in the British Museum, but the so-called Ma&amacr;thir-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; of the India Office Library, No. 3098, or 324 of the new Catalogue, is only a copy of the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma.

<p>I regret that the number of Errata and Addenda is so large, but when I began the revision I did not know that Sayyid A&hdotb;mad&apos;s text was so incorrect. It will be seen that at pp. 158 and 162 I have made two erroneous notes.


<p rend="class(signed)">H. B.





<pb n=v>
<div1 id=transliteration type=Note>
<head>Table of Transliteration.</head>


<p><table rend="align(center) columns(3)">
<column rend="align(center) font-size(large) width(8%)">
<column rend="width(25%)">
<row><cell><AR>A</AR> <cell>(Hamza) not represented at the beginning or end of a word; &hamza; in the middle of a word.
<row><cell><AR>b</AR>    <cell>b
<row><cell><AR>p</AR>    <cell>p
<row><cell><AR>t</AR>    <cell>t
<row><cell><AR>'t</AR>    <cell>&tdotb;
<row><cell><AR>th</AR>    <cell>&sumlb;
<row><cell><AR>j</AR>    <cell>j
<row><cell><AR>ch</AR>    <cell>ch
<row><cell><AR>H</AR>    <cell>h
<row><cell><AR>kh</AR>    <cell>kh
<row><cell><AR>d</AR>    <cell>d
<row><cell><AR>'d</AR>    <cell>&ddotb;
<row><cell><AR>dh</AR>    <cell>&zbarb;
<row><cell><AR>r</AR>    <cell>r
<row><cell><AR>'r</AR>    <cell>&rdotb;
<row><cell><AR>z</AR>    <cell>z
<row><cell><AR>zh</AR>    <cell>&zhbarb;
<row><cell><AR>s</AR>    <cell>s
<row><cell><AR>sh</AR>    <cell>&shbarb;
<row><cell><AR>S</AR>    <cell>&sdotb;
<row><cell><AR>D</AR>    <cell>&zdotb;
<row><cell><AR>T</AR>    <cell>&tumlb;
<row><cell><AR>Z</AR>    <cell>&zumlb;
<row><cell><AR>`</AR>    <cell>&ayin;
<row><cell><AR>gh</AR>    <cell>&ghbarb;
<row><cell><AR>f</AR>    <cell>f
<row><cell><AR>q</AR>    <cell>q
<row><cell><AR>k</AR>    <cell>k
<row><cell><AR>g</AR>    <cell>g
<row><cell><AR>l</AR>    <cell>l
<row><cell><AR>m</AR>    <cell>m
<row><cell><AR>n</AR>    <cell>n (m before <AR>b</AR> and <AR>p</AR>)
<row><cell><AR>U</AR>    <cell>w (v in Hindu names)
<row><cell><AR>"h</AR>    <cell>h (not represented at the end of a word except when radical)
<row><cell><AR>I</AR>    <cell>y
</table>


<!-- TODO: Fix the vowels to be shown on lines -->

<p rend="class(transcribernote)"><hi rend=sc>Transcriber&apos;s note:</hi> The presentation of Arabic vowels used in the source cannot be exactly reproduced in Unicode.


<p><hi rend=sc>Vowels</hi>&mdash;_<AR>a</AR>_ a. <AR>A</AR>_<AR>a</AR>_ &amacr;. <AR>AI</AR>_<AR>a</AR>_ (alif ma&kdotb;&sdotb;&umacr;ra) &amacr;.

<p>_<AR>i</AR>_ i. <AR>I</AR>_<AR>i</AR>_ &imacr;; e in some Hindu names. <AR>II</AR>_<AR>i</AR>_ iyy; &imacr; at the end of a word.

<p>_<AR>_u</AR>_ u. <AR>U</AR>_<AR>u</AR>_ &umacr;; o in some Hindu names. <AR>UU</AR>_<AR>u</AR>_ uww; &umacr; at the end of a word.


<p><hi rend=sc>Diphthongs</hi>&mdash;<AR>U</AR>_<AR>a</AR>_ au. <AR>UU</AR>_<AR>a</AR>_ aww. <AR>I</AR>_<AR>a</AR>_ ai. <AR>II</AR>_<AR>a</AR>_ ayy.

<p>The &lsquo;Iz&amacr;fat&rsquo; is rendered by &lsquo;-i-&rsquo;.

<p>The Persian copulative particle <AR>U</AR> is transliterated by &lsquo;u&rsquo;.

<p>The <AR>l</AR> of the Arabic article is assimilated according to rule, the final vowel of the preceding word being preserved.



<div1 type=Contents id=toc>
<head>Contents</head>


<list type=tocList>
    <item>                                             <ab type=tocPageNum>Page</ab>

    <item><ref target=yr1>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s Memoirs.</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>1</ab>
    <item><ref target=yr2>Feast of the Second New Year</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>85</ab>
    <item><ref target=yr3>The Third New Year&apos;s Feast from my Accession.</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>138</ab>
    <item><ref target=yr4>The Fourth New Year&apos;s Feast after the Auspicious Accession.</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>154</ab>
    <item><ref target=yr5>The Fifth New Year&apos;s Feast from the Auspicious Accession.</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>165</ab>
    <item><ref target=yr6>The Sixth New Year&apos;s Feast after my auspicious Accession.</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>191</ab>
    <item><ref target=yr7>The Seventh New Year&apos;s Festival after the auspicious Accession.</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>206</ab>
    <item><ref target=yr8>The Eighth New Year after the auspicious Accession.</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>235</ab>
    <item><ref target=yr9>The Ninth New Year&apos;s Feast after my auspicious Accession.</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>259</ab>
    <item><ref target=yr10>The Tenth New Year&apos;s Festival after my auspicious Accession.</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>280</ab>
    <item><ref target=yr11>The Eleventh New Year&apos;s Feast after the auspicious Accession.</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>317</ab>
    <item><ref target=yr12>The Twelfth New Year&apos;s Feast after my auspicious accession.</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>370</ab>

    <item><ref target=errata>Errata and Addenda.</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>447</ab>
</list>




<pb id=pb1 n=1>
</front>
<body>
<div1 type=Chapter n=I id=yr1>
<head type=super>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s Memoirs.</head>

<head type=sub><hi>In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Clement.</hi></head>


<head type=label>Chapter I.</head>


<p>By the boundless favour of Allah, when one sidereal hour of Thursday, Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-&sumlb;-&sumlb;&amacr;n&imacr; 20th, <hi rend=sc>A.H.</hi> 1014 (October 24th, 1605), had passed, I ascended the royal throne in the capital of Agra, in the 38th year of my age.<note n=1>That is, he was 37 years 3 months by the lunar calendar, and 36 years 1 month by solar reckoning (P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;hn&amacr;ma, i, 69). Elliot and all the MSS. have 8th Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-&sumlb;-&sumlb;&amacr;n&imacr; as the date of the accession, but this is clearly wrong, as Akbar did not die till 13th Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-&sumlb;-&sumlb;&amacr;n&imacr;. Evidently the copyists have, as is so often the case, misread <hi>bistam</hi> as <hi>ha&shbarb;tam</hi>. See Blochmann&apos;s remark, p. 454, note 3. That Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was not at this time 38 is shown by his stating at p. 37 that he celebrated his 38th birthday at Lahore after the capture of &Khbarb;usrau.</note>

<p>Till he was 28 years old, no child of my father had lived, and he was continually praying for the survival of a son to dervishes and recluses, by whom spiritual approach to the throne of Allah is obtained. As the great master, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n Chi&shbarb;t&imacr;, was the fountain-head of most of the saints of India, he considered that in order to obtain this object he should have recourse to his blessed threshold, and resolved within himself that if Almighty God should bestow a son on him he would, by way of complete humility, go on foot from Agra to his <pb id=pb2 n=2>blessed mausoleum, a distance of 140 <hi>kos</hi>. In <hi rend=sc>A.H.</hi> 977, on Wednesday, 17th Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal (August 31st, 1569), when seven <hi>&ghbarb;ar&imacr;</hi> of the aforesaid day had passed, when Libra (M&imacr;z&amacr;n) had risen to the 24th degree, God Almighty brought me into existence from the hiding-place of nothingness. At the time when my venerated father was on the outlook for a son, a dervish of the name of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Sal&imacr;m, a man of ecstatic condition, who had traversed many of the stages of life, had his abode on a hill near S&imacr;kr&imacr;, one of the villages of Agra, and the people of that neighbourhood had complete trust in him. As my father was very submissive to dervishes, he also visited him. One day, when waiting on him and in a state of distraction, he asked him how many sons he should have. The &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; replied, &ldquo;The Giver who gives without being asked will bestow three sons on you.&rdquo; My father said, &ldquo;I have made a vow that, casting my first son on the skirt of your favour, I will make your friendship and kindness his protector and preserver.&rdquo; The &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; accepted this idea, and said, &ldquo;I congratulate you, and I will give him my own name.&rdquo; When my mother came near the time of her delivery, he (Akbar) sent her to the &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;&apos;s house that I might be born there. After my birth they gave me the name of Sultan Sal&imacr;m, but I never heard my father, whether in his cups or in his sober moments, call me Mu&hdotb;ammad Sal&imacr;m or Sultan Sal&imacr;m, but always <hi>&Shbarb;ai&khbarb;&umacr; B&amacr;b&amacr;</hi>. My revered father, considering the village of S&imacr;kr&imacr;, which was the place of my birth, lucky for him, made it his capital. In the course of fourteen or fifteen years that hill, full of wild beasts, became a city containing all kinds of gardens and buildings, and lofty, elegant edifices and pleasant places, attractive to the heart. After the conquest of Gujar&amacr;t this village was named Fat&hdotb;p&umacr;r. When I became king it occurred to me to change my name, because this resembled that of the Emperor of R&umacr;m. An inspiration from the hidden world brought it into my mind <pb id=pb3 n=3>that, inasmuch as the business of kings is the controlling of the world, I should give myself the name of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r (World-seizer) and make my title of honour (<hi>laqab</hi>) N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n, inasmuch as my sitting on the throne coincided with the rising and shining on the earth of the great light (the Sun). I had also heard, in the days when I was a prince, from Indian sages, that after the expiration of the reign and life of King Jal&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n Akbar one named N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n would be administrator of the affairs of the State. Therefore I gave myself the name and appellation of N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h. As this great event took place in Agra, it is necessary that some account of that city should be given.

<p>Agra is one of the grand old cities of Hindustan. It had formerly an old fort on the bank of the Jumna, but this my father threw down before my birth, and he founded a fort of cut red stone, the like of which those who have travelled over the world cannot point out. It was completed in the space of fifteen or sixteen years. It had four gates and two sally-ports, and its cost was 35 lakhs of rupees, equal to 115,000 <hi>tom&amacr;n</hi> of current Persian coinage and to 10,500,000 <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;n&imacr;</hi> according to the T&umacr;r&amacr;n reckoning. The habitable part of the city extends on both sides of the river. On its west side, which has the greater population, its circumference is seven kos and its breadth is one kos. The circumference of the inhabited part on the other side of the water, the side towards the east, is 2&frac12; kos, its length being one kos and its breadth half a kos. But in the number of its buildings it is equal to several cities of &ayin;Ir&amacr;q, &Khbarb;ur&amacr;s&amacr;n, and M&amacr;war&amacr;&hamza;a-n-nahr (Transoxiana) put together. Many persons have erected buildings of three or four storeys in it. The mass of people is so great, that moving about in the lanes and bazars is difficult. It is on the boundary of the second climate. On its east is the province of Qanauj; on the west, N&amacr;gor; on the north, Sambhal; and on the south, Chander&imacr;.

<p>It is written in the books of the Hindus that the source <pb id=pb4 n=4>of the Jumna is in a hill of the name of Kalind,<note n=1>The Sanskrit Kalinda.</note> which men cannot reach because of the excessive cold. The apparent source is a hill near the pargana of &Khbarb;i&zdotb;r&amacr;b&amacr;d.

<p>The air of Agra is warm and dry; physicians say that it depresses the spirits (<hi>r&umacr;&hdotb;r&amacr; ba ta&hdotb;l&imacr;l m&imacr;barad</hi>) and induces weakness. It is unsuited to most temperaments, except to the phlegmatic and melancholy, which are safe from its bad effects. For this reason animals of this constitution and temperament, such as the elephant, the buffalo, and others, thrive in its climate.

<p>Before the rule of the Lod&imacr; Afghans, Agra was a great and populous place, and had a castle described by Mas&ayin;&umacr;d b. Sa&ayin;d b. Salm&amacr;n in the ode (<hi>qa&sdotb;&imacr;da</hi>) which he wrote in praise of Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d, son of Sultan Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m, son of Mas&ayin;&umacr;d, son of Sultan Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d of &Ghbarb;azn&imacr;, on the capture of the castle&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;The fort of Agra appeared in the midst of the dust
    <l>Like a mountain, and its battlements like peaks.&rdquo;<note n=2>The couplet appears in Mas&ayin;&umacr;d&apos;s divan, B.M. MS. Egerton, 701, p. 142a, line 4. The preceding lines show that the dust (<hi>gard</hi>) referred to in the first line means the dust caused by the invading army. I take the words <hi>bar&umacr; b&amacr;rh&amacr;&imacr;</hi> to mean the battlements or pinnacles of the fortress, the <hi>&imacr;</hi> at the end of <hi>b&amacr;rh&amacr;</hi> being intensive.</note>
</lg>


<p>When Sikandar Lod&imacr; designed to take Gwalior he came to Agra from Delhi, which was the capital of the Sultans of India, and settled down there. From that date the population and prosperity of Agra increased, and it became the capital of the Sultans of Delhi. When God Almighty bestowed the rule of India on this illustrious family, the late king, B&amacr;bar, after the defeat of Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m, the son of Sikandar Lod&imacr;, and his being killed, and after his victory over R&amacr;n&amacr; S&amacr;ng&amacr;, who was the chief of the Rajas of Hindustan, established on the east side of the Jumna, on improved land, a garden (<hi>ch&amacr;rb&amacr;&ghbarb;</hi>) which few places equal in beauty. He gave it the name of Gul-af&shbarb;&amacr;n <pb id=pb5 n=5>(Flower-scatterer), and erected in it a small building of cut red stone, and having completed a mosque on one side of it he intended to make a lofty building, but time failed him and his design was never carried into execution.

<p>In these Memoirs, whenever <hi>&Sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ib qir&amacr;n&imacr;</hi> is written it refers to Am&imacr;r T&imacr;m&umacr;r G&umacr;rg&amacr;n; and whenever <hi>Fird&umacr;s-mak&amacr;n&imacr;</hi> is mentioned, to B&amacr;bar P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h; when <hi>Jannat-&amacr;&shbarb;y&amacr;n&imacr;</hi> is used, to Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h; and when <hi>&ayin;Ar&shbarb;-&amacr;&shbarb;y&amacr;n&imacr;</hi> is employed, to my revered father, Jal&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad Akbar P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;.

<p>Melons, mangoes, and other fruits grow well in Agra and its neighbourhood. Of all fruits I am very fond of mangoes. In the reign of my father (<hi>&ayin;Ar&shbarb;-&amacr;&shbarb;y&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>) many fruits of other countries, which till then were not to be had in India, were obtained there. Several sorts of grapes, such as the <hi>&sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ib&imacr;</hi> and the <hi>&hdotb;ab&shbarb;&imacr;</hi><note n=1>Erskine&apos;s manuscript translation of the T&umacr;zuk-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;, B.M. MS. Add. 26,611, and the B.M. MS. have <hi>ch&imacr;n&imacr;</hi>, not <hi>&hdotb;ab&shbarb;&imacr;</hi>. But I.O. MS. No. 181 and the R.A.S. MS. have <hi>&hdotb;usain&imacr;</hi>, and this seems right. See Memoirs, Leyden &amp; Erskine, p. 326, and the Haidarabad Turk&imacr; text, p. 284. The <hi>ki&shbarb;mi&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> is a small grape like that of which currants are made.</note> and the <hi>ki&shbarb;mi&shbarb;&imacr;</hi>, became common in several towns; for instance, in the bazars of Lahore every kind and variety that may be desired can be had in the grape season. Among fruits, one which they call <hi>anan&amacr;s</hi> (pineapple), which is grown in the Frank ports,<note n=2>Cf. <hi>infra</hi> the account of the 11th year, p. 173.</note> is of excessive fragrance and fine flavour. Many thousands are produced every year now in the Gul-af&shbarb;&amacr;n garden at Agra.

<p>From the excellencies of its sweet-scented flowers one may prefer the fragrances of India to those of the flowers of the whole world. It has many such that nothing in the whole world can be compared to them. The first is the <hi>champa</hi> (<hi>Michelia champaca</hi>), which is a flower of exceedingly sweet fragrance; it has the shape of the saffron-flower, but is yellow inclining to white. The tree is very symmetrical <pb id=pb6 n=6>and large, full of branches and leaves, and is shady. When in flower one tree will perfume a garden. Surpassing this is the <hi>keo&rdotb;&amacr;</hi><note n=1>See Memoirs. L. &amp; E., p. 330.</note> flower (<hi>Pandanus odoratissimus</hi>). Its shape and appearance are singular, and its scent is so strong and penetrating that it does not yield to the odour of musk. Another is the <hi>r&amacr;e bel</hi>,<note n=2>The name <hi>r&amacr;e bel</hi> is not given in Clarke&apos;s Roxburgh, but perhaps it is one of the jessamines, and may be the <hi>bela</hi> of Clarke (p. 30). The <hi>r&amacr;e bel</hi> is described by Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l (Blochmann, pp. 76 and 82). The statement about its flowers being double and treble is obscure. Erskine renders the passage &ldquo;The leaves are generally two and three fold.&rdquo; The Persian word is <hi>&tumlb;abaqa</hi>, which apparently is equivalent to the <hi>t&umacr;&imacr;</hi> or fold of the &Amacr;y&imacr;n-i-Akbar&imacr;, Persian text, i, 96. The reference may be to the flowers growing in umbels.</note> which in scent resembles white jessamine. Its flowers are double and treble (?). Another is the <hi>m&umacr;lsar&imacr;</hi><note n=3>This is the <hi>bokul</hi> of Indian gardens (Clarke, p. 313), and well deserves Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s praise. It is probably the <hi>bhols&amacr;r&imacr;</hi> mentioned in the &Amacr;y&imacr;n (Blochmann, No. 10, p. 83). Blochmann gives <hi>bholsir&imacr;</hi> (p. 70) as the name of a fruit-tree, and the <hi>bhols&amacr;r&imacr;</hi> of p. 83 maybe a mistake for <hi>m&umacr;lsar&imacr;</hi>.</note> (<hi>Mimusops Elengi</hi>). This tree, too, is very graceful and symmetrical, and is shady. The scent of its flowers is very pleasant. Another is the <hi>ketak&imacr;</hi><note n=4>The text has <hi>sewt&imacr;</hi>, but the <hi>sewt&imacr;</hi> seems to be the <hi>Rosa glandulifera</hi> of Roxburgh (Clarke, p. 407) and has no resemblance to the <hi>Pandanus</hi>. See also the description of the <hi>sewt&imacr;</hi>, Blochmann, p. 82. (Perhaps there are two <hi>sewt&imacr;s</hi>, one famous for fragrance, the other for beauty. See l.c., pp. 76 and 82.) What is meant in the text is evidently a <hi>Pandanus</hi> and the <hi>ketk&imacr;</hi> of Blochmann, p. 83. I have followed, therefore, I.O. MS. 181, and have substituted <hi>ketk&imacr;</hi> for <hi>sewt&imacr;</hi>. The <hi>ketk&imacr;</hi> may be <hi>Pandanus inermis</hi>, which has no thorns (Clarke, p. 708). Erskine also has <hi>ketk&imacr;</hi>.</note> (<hi>Pandanus</hi> ?), which is of the nature of the <hi>keo&rdotb;&amacr;</hi>, but the latter is thorny, whereas the <hi>ketk&imacr;</hi> has no thorns. Moreover, the <hi>ketk&imacr;</hi> is yellowish, whereas the <hi>keo&rdotb;&amacr;</hi> is white. From these two flowers and also from the <hi>chambel&imacr;</hi><note n=5>L.c. p. 33 et seq.</note> (<hi>Jasminum grandiflorum</hi>), which is the white jessamine of <hi>wil&amacr;yat</hi> (Persia or Afghanistan), they extract sweet-scented oils. There are other flowers too numerous to mention. Of trees there are the cypress (<hi>sarw</hi>), the pine <pb id=pb7 n=7>(<hi>san&umacr;bar</hi>), the <hi>chanar</hi> (<hi>Platanus orientalis</hi>), the white poplar (<hi>saf&imacr;d&amacr;r</hi>, <hi>Populus alba</hi>), and the <hi>b&imacr;d m&umacr;ll&amacr;</hi> (willow), which they had formerly never thought of in Hindustan, but are now plentiful. The sandal-tree, which once was peculiar to the islands (i.e., Java, Sumatra, etc.), also flourishes in the gardens.

<p>The inhabitants of Agra exert themselves greatly in the acquirement of crafts and the search after learning. Various professors of every religion and creed have taken up their abode in the city.

<p>After my accession, the first order that I gave was for the fastening up of the Chain of Justice, so that if those engaged in the administration of justice should delay or practise hypocrisy in the matter of those seeking justice, the oppressed might come to this chain and shake it so that its noise might attract attention. Its fashion was this: I ordered them to make a chain of pure gold,<note n=1>Du Jarric, who got his information from missionary reports, seems to imply that the chain was of silver, and says that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was following the idea of an old Persian king. It is mentioned in the Siyar al-muta&hamza;a&khbarb;&khbarb;ir&imacr;n (reprint, i, 230) that Mu&hdotb;ammad &Shbarb;&amacr;h in 1721 revived this, and hung a long chain with a bell attached to it from the octagon tower which looked towards the river.</note> 30 <hi>gaz</hi> in length and containing 60 bells. Its weight was 4 Indian maunds, equal to 42 &ayin;Ir&amacr;q&imacr; maunds. One end of it they made fast to the battlements of the Sh&amacr;h Burj of the fort at Agra and the other to a stone post fixed on the bank of the river. I also gave twelve orders to be observed as rules of conduct (<hi>dast&umacr;ru-l-&ayin;amal</hi>) in all my dominions&mdash;

<p>(1) Forbidding the levy of cesses under the names of <hi>tamgh&amacr;</hi> and <hi>m&imacr;r ba&hdotb;r&imacr;</hi> (river tolls), and other burdens which the <hi>j&amacr;g&imacr;rd&amacr;rs</hi> of every province and district had imposed for their own profit.

<p>(2) On roads where thefts and robberies took place, which roads might be at a little distance from habitations, the <pb id=pb8 n=8><hi>j&amacr;g&imacr;rd&amacr;rs</hi> of the neighbourhood should build <hi>sar&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;s</hi> (public rest-houses), mosques, and dig wells, which might stimulate population, and people might settle down in those <hi>sar&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;s</hi>. If these should be near a <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;li&sdotb;a</hi> estate (under direct State management), the administrator (<hi>muta&sdotb;add&imacr;</hi>) of that place should execute the work.

<p><note n=1>In text this is wrongly made part of regulation 2.</note>(3) The bales of merchants should not be opened on the roads without informing them and obtaining their leave.

<p>(4) In my dominions if anyone, whether unbeliever or Musalman, should die, his property and effects should be left for his heirs, and no one should interfere with them. If he should have no heir, they should appoint inspectors and separate guardians to guard the property, so that its value might be expended in lawful expenditure, such as the building of mosques and <hi>sar&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;s</hi>, the repair of broken bridges, and the digging of tanks and wells.

<p>(5) They should not make wine or rice-spirit (<hi>darbahra</hi>)<note n=2>Gladwin and the MSS. have <hi>dilbahra</hi> (exhilarating drink), and this is probably correct. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r would know little about rice-spirit.</note> or any kind of intoxicating drug, or sell them; although I myself drink wine, and from the age of 18 years up till now, when I am 38, have persisted in it. When I first took a liking to drinking I sometimes took as much as twenty cups of double-distilled spirit; when by degrees it acquired a great influence over me I endeavoured to lessen the quantity, and in the period of seven years I have brought myself from fifteen cups to five or six. My times for drinking were varied; sometimes when three or four sidereal hours of the day remained I would begin to drink, and sometimes at night and partly by day. This went on till I was 30 years old. After that I took to drinking always at night. Now I drink only to digest my food.

<p><note n=3>This regulation is more fully expounded in Price, p. 7.</note>(6) They should not take possession of any person&apos;s house.

<pb id=pb9 n=9><p>(7) I forbade the cutting off the nose or ears of any person, and I myself made a vow by the throne of God that I would not blemish anyone by this punishment.

<p>(8) I gave an order that the officials of the Crown lands and the <hi>j&amacr;g&imacr;rd&amacr;rs</hi> should not forcibly take the ryots&apos; lands and cultivate them on their own account.

<p>(9) A government collector or a <hi>j&amacr;g&imacr;rd&amacr;r</hi> should not without permission intermarry with the people of the <hi>pargana</hi> in which he might be.

<p>(10) They should found hospitals in the great cities, and appoint physicians for the healing of the sick; whatever the expenditure might be, should be given from the <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;li&sdotb;a</hi> establishment.

<p>(11) In accordance with the regulations of my revered father, I ordered that each year from the 18th<note n=1>It is curious that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r should give the 18th Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal as his birthday, while the authorities give it as the 17th. Probably the mistake has arisen from Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s writing Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal instead of &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war. His birthday was Ra&shbarb;n the 18th day of &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war (see Akbarn&amacr;ma, ii, 344), but it was the 17th Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal. See Mu&hdotb;ammad H&amacr;d&imacr;&apos;s preface, p. 2, and Beale, and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s own statement a few lines above. Possibly Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r wished to make out that he was born on the 18th Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal and a Thursday, because he regarded Thursday as a blessed day (<hi>mub&amacr;rak &shbarb;amba</hi>), whilst he regarded Wednesday as peculiarly unlucky, and called it <hi>kam</hi>, or <hi>gam</hi>, <hi>&shbarb;amba</hi>.</note> of Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal, which is my birthday, for a number of days corresponding to the years of my life, they should not slaughter animals (for food). Two days in each week were also forbidden, one of them Thursday, the day of my accession, and the other Sunday, the day of my father&apos;s birth. He held this day in great esteem on this account, and because it was dedicated to the Sun, and also because it was the day on which the Creation began. Therefore it was one of the days on which there was no killing in his dominions.<note n=2>Cf. Elliot&apos;s translation, vi, 513, and note 2.</note>

<p>(12) I gave a general order that the offices and <hi>j&amacr;g&imacr;rs</hi> of my father&apos;s servants should remain as they were. Later, the <hi><corr sic="man&sdotb;abs">mansabs</corr></hi> (ranks or offices) were increased according to <pb id=pb10 n=10>each one&apos;s circumstances by not less than 20 per cent. to 300 or 400 per cent. The subsistence money of the <hi>a&hdotb;ad&imacr;s</hi> was increased by 50 per cent., and I raised the pay of all domestics by 20 per cent. I increased the allowances of all the veiled ladies of my father&apos;s harem from 20 per cent. to 100 per cent., according to their condition and relationship. By one stroke of the pen I confirmed the subsistence lands<note n=1>The MSS. have &ldquo;the subsistence lands of people in general (<hi>ah&amacr;l&imacr;</hi>) and the <hi>aimas</hi>.&rdquo;</note> of the holders of <hi>aimas</hi> (charity lands) within the dominions, who form the army of prayer, according to the deeds in their possession. I gave an order to M&imacr;r&amacr;n &Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n, who is one of the genuine Sayyids of India, and who for a long time held the high office of <hi>&sdotb;adr</hi> (ecclesiastical officer) under my father, that he should every day produce before me deserving people (worthy of charity). <note n=2>In the text and in Elliot, vi, 515, this is made a separate order, but it is not so in the MSS. If it were, we should have thirteen instead of twelve regulations. This is avoided in text and in Elliot by putting the 8th and 7th regulations into one ordinance. With regard to the regulation about releasing the prisoners, Sir Henry Elliot is somewhat unjust to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r in his commentary at p. 515. It was only those who had been <hi>long</hi> imprisoned whom Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r released, and his proceedings at Ranthambhor in the 13th year (T&umacr;zuk, p. 256) show that he exercised discrimination in releasing prisoners. The account in Price, p. 10, may also be consulted. There Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r says he released 7,000 men from Gwalior alone. It may be remembered that most of these were political offenders. Private criminals were for the most part put to death, or mutilated, or fined. There were no regular jails.</note>I released all criminals who had been confined and imprisoned for a long time in the forts and prisons.<note n=3>The above translation of the Institutes should be compared with Sir Henry Elliot&apos;s translation and his commentary: History of India, E. &amp; D., vol. vi, Appendix, p. 493.</note>

<p>At a propitious hour I ordered that they should coin gold and silver of different weights. To each coin I gave a separate name, viz., to the <hi>muhr</hi> of 100 <hi>tola</hi>, that of <hi>n&umacr;r-&shbarb;&amacr;h&imacr;</hi>; to that of 50 <hi>tola</hi>, that of <hi>n&umacr;r-sul&tumlb;&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>; to that of 20 <hi>tola</hi>, <hi>n&umacr;r-daulat</hi>; to that of 10 <hi>tola</hi>, <hi>n&umacr;r-karam</hi>; to that of 5 <hi>tola</hi>, <hi>n&umacr;r-mihr</hi>; and to that of 1 <hi>tola</hi>, <pb id=pb11 n=11><hi>n&umacr;r-jah&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>. The half of this I called <hi>n&umacr;r&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>, and the quarter, <hi>raw&amacr;j&imacr;</hi>. With regard to the silver coins (<hi>sikkas</hi>). I gave to the coin of 100 <hi>tola</hi> the name of <hi>kaukab-i-&tumlb;&amacr;li&ayin;</hi> (star of horoscope); to that of 50 <hi>tola</hi>, the name of <hi>kaukab-i-iqb&amacr;l</hi> (star of fortune); to that of 20 <hi>tola</hi>, the name of <hi>kaukab-i-mur&amacr;d</hi> (star of desire); to that of 10 <hi>tola</hi>, the name of <hi>kaukab-i-ba&khbarb;t</hi> (star of good luck); to that of 5 <hi>tola</hi>, the name of <hi>kaukab-i-sa&ayin;d</hi> (star of auspiciousness); to that of 1 <hi>tola</hi>, the name of <hi>jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;</hi>. The half <hi>jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;</hi> I called <hi>sul&tumlb;&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>; the quarter, <hi>nis&amacr;r&imacr;</hi><note n=1>Erskine&apos;s MS. has <hi>&imacr;&sumlb;&amacr;r&imacr;</hi> for <hi>ni&sumlb;&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>, and <hi>a&khbarb;tar-i-qab&umacr;l</hi> instead of <hi>&khbarb;air-i-qab&umacr;l</hi>.</note> (showering money); the dime, <hi>&khbarb;air-i-qab&umacr;l</hi> (the acceptable). Copper, also, I coined in the same proportions, and gave each division a particular name. I ordered that on the gold <hi>muhr</hi> of 100, 50, 20, and 10 <hi>tola</hi> the following verse by &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n<note n=2>This is Blochmann&apos;s &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n No. iii, viz. M&imacr;rz&amacr; Ja&ayin;far Beg. See pp. 368 and 411.</note> should be impressed&mdash;namely, on the obverse was this couplet:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Fate&apos;s pen wrote on the coin in letters of light,
    <l>The &Shbarb;&amacr;h N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&rdquo;;
</lg>


<p>and between the lines of the verse the Creed (<hi>Kalima</hi>) was impressed. On the reverse was this couplet, in which the date of coinage was signified:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Through this coin is the world brightened as by the sun,
    <l>And the date thereof is &lsquo;Sun of Dominion&rsquo; (&Amacr;ft&amacr;b-i-Mamlakat).&rdquo;<note n=3>The words &Amacr;ft&amacr;b-i-Mamlakat yield, according to the numeration by <hi>abjad</hi>, the date 1014 <hi rend=sc>A.H.</hi> (1605).</note>
</lg>


<p>Between the lines of the verse, the mint, the Hijra year, and the regnal year were impressed. On the <hi>n&umacr;r-jah&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>, which is in the place of the ordinary gold <hi>muhr</hi> and exceeds it in weight by 20 per cent. (as 12 to 10), is impressed this couplet of the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr;:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;&Shbarb;&amacr;h N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r ibn Akbar P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h
    <l>Made gold&apos;s face bright with the sheen of sun and moon.&rdquo;
</lg>


<pb id=pb12 n=12><p>Accordingly, a hemistich was impressed on each face, and also the mint, and the Hijra and regnal year. The <hi>jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; sikka</hi>, also, which is greater in weight by 20 per cent., was reckoned as equal to a rupee, its weight being fixed in the same manner as that of the <hi>n&umacr;r-jah&amacr;n&imacr;</hi> (each was a <hi>tola</hi> in weight, but one was in gold and the other was in silver). The weight of a <hi>tola</hi> is 2&frac12; <hi>mi&sumlb;q&amacr;ls</hi> of Persia and T&umacr;r&amacr;n.<note n=1>Page 4 of the text is followed by engravings of the coins of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r and the inscriptions thereon, for which the editor, Saiyid A&hdotb;mad, says he is indebted to Mr. Thornhill, the Judge of Meerut. They do not show the lines of poetry. There is an interesting article on the couplets on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s coins by Mr. C. J. Rodgers, J.A.S.B. for 1888, p. 18.</note>

<p>It would not be good to give all the versified chronograms which were made for my accession. I therefore content myself with the one which Makt&umacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the superintendent of the library and picture gallery, and one of my old servants, composed&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;The second lord of conjunction, &Shbarb;&amacr;hin&shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r,
    <l>With justice and equity sat on the throne of happiness.
    <l>Prosperity, Good Fortune, Wealth, Dignity, and Victory,
    <l>With loins girt in his service, stood rejoicing before him.
    <l>It became the date of the accession when Prosperity
    <l>Placed his head at the feet of the &Sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ib-Qir&amacr;n-i-&Sumlb;&amacr;n&imacr;.&rdquo;<note n=2>The chronogram is ingenious. The words &Sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ib-Qir&amacr;n-i-&Sumlb;&amacr;n&imacr; yield only 1013 according to <hi>abjad</hi>, and this is a year too little. But the verse states that Prosperity (or Fortune), Iqb&amacr;l, laid his head at the second lord of conjunction&apos;s feet, and the head of Iqb&amacr;l, according to the parlance of chronogram-composers, is the first letter of the word, that is, alif, which stands for one (<AR>A</AR>) in <hi>abjad</hi>, and so the date 1014 is made up. &Sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ib-Qir&amacr;n-i-&Sumlb;&amacr;n&imacr; means &lsquo;the second lord of conjunction,&rsquo; and is a title generally applied to &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n; the first lord of conjunction (i.e the conjunction of Jupiter and Venus) was T&imacr;m&umacr;r.</note>
</lg>


<p>To my son &Khbarb;usrau a lakh of rupees was presented that he might build up for himself the house of Mun&ayin;im &Khbarb;&amacr;n,<note n=3>A great officer under Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n and Akbar. See &Amacr;y&imacr;n, Blochmann, p. 317.</note> the (former) &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n, outside the fort. The administration and government of the Panjab was bestowed on <pb id=pb13 n=13>Sa&ayin;id &Khbarb;&amacr;n,<note n=1>Blochmann, p. 331. He had 1,200 eunuchs. He is generally styled Sa&ayin;&imacr;d Cha&ghbarb;atai. The exact nature of his relationship does not appear. It is not mentioned in his biography in the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, ii, 403. Perhaps the word <hi>(nisbat)</hi> does not here mean affinity by marriage.</note> who was one of the confidential nobles and connected with my father by marriage. His origin was from the Moghul tribe, and his ancestors were in the service of my forefathers. At the time of his taking leave, as it was said that his eunuchs oppressed and tyrannized over the weak and the poor, I sent a message to him that my justice would not put up with oppression from anyone, and that in the scales of equity neither smallness nor greatness was regarded. If after this any cruelty or harshness should be observed on the part of his people, he would receive punishment without favour.<note n=2>According to the account in Price, p. 16, and in the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, ii, 405, Sa&ayin;&imacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n gave a bond that if his people were oppressive he would forfeit his head.</note>

<p>Again, having previously bestowed on &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Far&imacr;d Bu&khbarb;&amacr;r&imacr;, who had been <hi>M&imacr;r Ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> in my father&apos;s service, a dress of honour, a jewelled sword, a jewelled inkstand and pen, I confirmed him in the same post, and in order to exalt him I said to him, &ldquo;I regard thee as <hi>&Sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ibu-s-saif-wa-l-qalam&rdquo;</hi> (&ldquo;Captain Sword and Captain Pen&rdquo;). Muq&imacr;m,<note n=3>He does not seem to have had any real power, and he was soon superseded. See Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, iii, 932.</note> to whom my father had given at the end of his reign the title of Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n and the viziership of his dominions, I selected for the same title, rank, and service. I also gave &Khbarb;w&amacr;jag&imacr; Fat&hdotb;u-llah a dress of honour, and made him a bakhshi, as formerly &ayin;Abdu-r-Razz&amacr;q Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r&imacr;, although when I was prince he had left my service without cause or reason and had gone over to my father, I made bakhshi as formerly, and I gave him a dress of honour. To Am&imacr;nu-d-daula, who when I was prince had the post of bakhshi, and without my leave had run away and taken service with my revered father, not looking to his offences I gave the office <pb id=pb14 n=14>of <hi>&Amacr;ti&shbarb;-i-beg&imacr;</hi><note n=1>It appears from Erskine and from I.O. MS. that this is a mistake for Y&amacr;ti&shbarb;-beg&imacr;, &lsquo;Captain of the Watch,&rsquo; and that the name is Am&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n, and not Am&imacr;nu-d-daula. See Akbarn&amacr;ma, iii, 474, etc.</note> (Head of the Artillery), which he had held under my father. I left all those who were in possession of posts, both inside and outside, in the positions which they had with my father. &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f &Khbarb;&amacr;n<note n=2>&Shbarb;ar&imacr;f &Khbarb;&amacr;n had been sent by Akbar to recall Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r to his duty, but instead of coming back he stayed on. He did not accompany Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r when the latter went off the second time to wait upon his father. Probably he was afraid to do so. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r appointed him to Bihar before he left Allahabad to visit his father for the second time. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r says &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f waited upon him fifteen days after his accession, and on <pb>4th Rajab. This is another proof, if proof were needed, that the copyists have misread the opening sentence of the T&umacr;zuk and have written <hi>ha&shbarb;tam</hi> instead of <hi>bistam</hi>, for 4th Rajab is fifteen days after 20th Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-l-&amacr;&khbarb;ir. The P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;hn&amacr;ma and &Khbarb;&amacr;f&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n have 20th, and Price and Price&apos;s original say that &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f arrived sixteen days after the accession.</note> had lived with me from his early years. When I was prince I had given him the title of <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;n</hi>, and when I left Allahabad to wait upon my honoured father I presented him with a drum and the <hi>t&umacr;m&amacr;n-to&ghbarb;</hi> (standard of <hi>y&amacr;k</hi> tails). I had also promoted him to the rank of 2,500 and given him the government of the province of Bihar. I gave him complete control over the province, and sent him off there. On the 4th of Rajab, being fifteen days after my accession, he waited upon me. I was exceedingly pleased at his coming, for his connection with me is such that I look upon him as a brother, a son, a friend, and a companion. As I had perfect confidence in his friendship, intelligence, learning, and acquaintance with affairs, having made him Grand Vizier, I promoted him to the rank of 5,000 with 5,000 horse and the lofty title of <hi>Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr;</hi>, to which no title of my servants is superior. Though his position might have warranted a higher rank, he himself represented to me that until some notable service on his part had become perceptible to me he would not accept a higher grade than that mentioned (5,000).

<p>As the reality of the loyalty of my father&apos;s servants had not yet become apparent, and certain faults and errors and unbecoming intentions which were not approved at the throne of the Creator or pleasing to His creatures had <pb id=pb15 n=15>shown themselves, they of themselves became ashamed. Though on the day of my accession I had forgiven all offences and determined with myself that I would exact no retribution for past deeds, yet on account of the suspicion that had been aroused in my mind about them I considered the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; my guardian and protector; although God Almighty is the guardian of all His servants, and is especially so of kings, because their existence is the cause of the contentment of the world. His father, &ayin;Abdu-&sdotb;-&Sdotb;amad, who in the art of painting had no equal in the age, had obtained from the late king (<hi>Jannat-&amacr;&shbarb;y&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>) Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n the title of <hi>&Shbarb;&imacr;r&imacr;n-qalam</hi> (Sweet pen), and in his council had attained a great dignity and was on intimate terms with him (the king). He was one of the chief men of &Shbarb;&imacr;r&amacr;z. My honoured father, on account of his former services, paid him great honour and reverence. I made Raja M&amacr;n Singh&mdash;who was one of the greatest and most trusted noblemen of my father, and had obtained alliances with this illustrious family, inasmuch as his aunt had been in my father&apos;s house (i.e. was his wife),<note n=1>I.O. MS. 181 and Mu&hdotb;ammad H&amacr;d&imacr; have Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ni&sumlb;&amacr;r Begam. &Khbarb;&amacr;f&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, i, 245, has Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Begam, and says she was born in 994. Price&apos;s Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, p. 20, says she was born a year before &Khbarb;usrau. She built a tomb for herself in the &Khbarb;usrau B&amacr;&ghbarb;, Allahabad, but she is not buried there (see J.R.A.S. for July, 1907, p. 607). She died on 4th &Shbarb;a&ayin;b&amacr;n, 1056 (5th September, 1646), and was at her own request buried in her grandfather&apos;s tomb at Sikandra (P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;hn&amacr;ma, ii, 603&ndash;4).</note> and I had married his sister, and &Khbarb;usrau and his sister Sul&tumlb;&amacr;nu-n-nis&amacr; Begam, the latter of whom is my eldest child, were born of her&mdash;as before, ruler of the province of Bengal. Though as in consequence of certain of his acts he had no expectation of this favour towards himself, I dignified him with a <hi>ch&amacr;rqab</hi> (vest without sleeves) as a robe of honour, a jewelled sword, and <pb id=pb16 n=16>one of my own horses, and sent him off to his province, which is a place of (or can keep up) 50,000 horse. His father was Raja Bhagw&amacr;n D&amacr;s. His grandfather, Raja Bih&amacr;r&imacr; Mal, was the first of the Kachw&amacr;ha R&amacr;jp&umacr;ts to have the honour of entering my father&apos;s service, and he excelled his tribe in truth and sincerity of friendship, and in the quality of valour. After my accession, when all the nobles with their retinues presented themselves at my palace, it came into my mind that I should send this body of retainers under my son, Sultan Parw&imacr;z, to make a holy war against the R&amacr;n&amacr;, who was one of evil deeds, and a foul infidel of the country of Hindustan, and in my father&apos;s time had had troops sent constantly against him, but had not been driven off. In a fortunate hour I invested my said son with gorgeous robes of honour, a jewelled waist-sword, a jewelled waist-dagger, and a rosary of pearls intermixed with rubies of great price of the value of 72,000 rupees, &ayin;Ir&amacr;q and Turkm&amacr;n horses and famous elephants, and dismissed him. About 20,000 horsemen with nobles and chief leaders were appointed to this service. The first was &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who in my father&apos;s time was one of his confidential servants, and for a long time had been confirmed in the post of bakhshi and afterwards became <hi>d&imacr;w&amacr;n ba istiql&amacr;l</hi> (Chancellor with full powers); him I advanced from the rank of an Am&imacr;r to that of Vizier, and promoting him from the command of 2,500 horse to that of 5,000 made him guardian to Parw&imacr;z. Having honoured him with a robe of honour, jewelled waist-sword, a horse and an elephant, I ordered that all the <hi>man&sdotb;abd&amacr;rs</hi> (commanders), small and great, should not depart from such orders as he thought proper to give them. I made &ayin;Abdu-r-Razz&amacr;q Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r&imacr; his bakhshi and Mu&khbarb;t&amacr;r Beg, &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s paternal uncle, diwan to Parw&imacr;z. I also presented to Raja Jagann&amacr;th, son of Raja Bih&amacr;r&imacr; Mal, who had the rank of 5,000, a robe of honour and a jewelled waist-sword.

<p>Again, I gave R&amacr;n&amacr; &Shbarb;ankar, cousin of the R&amacr;n&amacr;&mdash;to <pb id=pb17 n=17>whom my father had given the title of R&amacr;n&amacr;, proposing to send him with &Khbarb;usrau against the R&amacr;n&amacr;, but at that time he (Akbar) became a <hi>&shbarb;anqar</hi> (a falcon, i.e. he died)&mdash;a robe of honour and a jewelled sword, and sent him with him.

<p>I presented M&amacr;dho Singh, brother&apos;s son of Raja M&amacr;n Singh, and R&amacr;wal S&amacr;l Darb&amacr;r&imacr; with flags, from this consideration, that they were always present at Court and belonged to the Sekh&amacr;wa&tdotb;<note n=1>Should be &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;&amacr;wa&tdotb;.</note> R&amacr;jp&umacr;ts, and were confidential servants of my father. Each received also the rank of 3,000.

<p>I promoted &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ruknu-d-d&imacr;n the Afghan, to whom when I was prince I had given the title of &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, from the grade of 500 to that of 3,500 &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n is the head of his clan and a very valiant man. He lost his arm by the sword in service against the Uzbegs.<note n=2>The R.A.S. and I.O. MSS. have here Umr&amacr; instead of Uzbegs. Umr&amacr; here stands, I think, for Umr Singh, the R&amacr;n&amacr; of Udaip&umacr;r, and the meaning is that &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n lost his arm in service against the R&amacr;n&amacr;.</note> &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;m&amacr;n, son of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l, Mah&amacr; Singh, grandson of R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh, Z&amacr;hid &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of S&amacr;diq &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Waz&imacr;r Jam&imacr;l, and Qar&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Turkm&amacr;n were exalted to the rank of 2,000; all these obtained robes of honour and horses, and were dismissed. Manohar also obtained leave to join the expedition. He is of the tribe of the Sekh&amacr;wa&tdotb; Kachhw&amacr;has, and on him in his young days my father bestowed many favours. He had learned the Persian language, and, although from him up to Adam the power of understanding cannot be attributed to any one of his tribe, he is not without intelligence. He makes Persian verses, and the following is one of his couplets:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;The object of shade in Creation is this:
    <l>That no one place his foot on the light of my Lord, the Sun.&rdquo;<note n=3>The point of the verse seems to be that light is regarded as something spread like a carpet on the ground, and that to place the foot upon <pb>it is to insult the sun. Compare Price, p. 33; but Manohar&apos;s verse is wrongly translated there owing to a badly written MS. For Manohar see Akbarn&amacr;ma, iii, 221, and Baday&umacr;n&imacr;, iii, 201, also Blochmann, p. 494, and his article in <hi>Calcutta Review</hi> for April, 1871, also the Dabist&amacr;n, translation, ii, 53.</note>
</lg>


<pb id=pb18 n=18><p>If the details were to be described of all the commanders and servants appointed by me, with the conditions and connections and rank of each, it would be a long business. Many of my immediate attendants and personal followers and nobles&apos; sons, house-born ones (<hi>&khbarb;&amacr;naz&amacr;d&amacr;n</hi>) and zealous Rajputs, petitioned to accompany this expedition. A thousand ahadis, the meaning of which is single ones (Blochmann, p. 20), were also appointed. In short, a force was collected together such that if reliance on the Friend (God) were vouchsafed, it could have embarked on enmity and conflict with any one of the monarchs of power.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Soldiers came up from all sides,
    <l>Seizing life from heroes of the world in battle;
    <l>They had no fear of death from the sharp sword,
    <l>No terror of water<note n=1>Probably here <hi>&amacr;b</hi> means both water and the water of the sword. These lines are not in the R.A.S. or I.O. MSS.</note> and no flight from fire;
    <l>In valour singular, in vigour a crowd,
    <l>Anvils in endurance, rocks in attack.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>When I was prince I had entrusted, in consequence of my extreme confidence<note n=2>Text, <hi>i&hdotb;tiy&amacr;&tumlb;</hi> (caution); the MSS. have <hi>i&ayin;tiq&amacr;d</hi> (confidence), and I adopt this reading.</note> in him, my own <hi>&umacr;zuk</hi> seal<note n=3>Blochmann, p. 52. It was a small round seal. <hi>&Umacr;z&umacr;k</hi> or <hi>&umacr;zuk</hi> is a Tartar word meaning a ring, i.e. a signet-ring.</note> to the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; (&Shbarb;ar&imacr;f), but when he was sent off to the province of Bihar I made it over to Parw&imacr;z. Now that Parw&imacr;z went off against the R&amacr;n&amacr;, I made it over, according to the former arrangement, to the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr;.

<p>Parw&imacr;z was born of &Sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ib-Jam&amacr;l (Mistress of Beauty), <pb id=pb19 n=19>the cousin<note n=1>Text, <hi>&sdotb;abiyya</hi> (daughter), and this led Blochmann (p. 477, note 2) to say that if Sayyid A&hdotb;mad&apos;s text was correct Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r must have forgotten, in the number of his wives, which of them was the mother of Parw&imacr;z. As a fact, Sayyid A&hdotb;mad&apos;s text is not correct, though the R.A.S. MS. agrees with it. The two excellent I.O. MSS. have <hi>&khbarb;w&imacr;&shbarb;</hi> (relative), which is here equivalent to cousin. So also has the B.M. MS. used by Erskine. According to Mu&hdotb;ammad H&amacr;d&imacr;&apos;s preface Parw&imacr;z&apos;s mother was the daughter of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &Hdotb;asan, the paternal uncle of Zain &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka. His birth was in Mu&hdotb;arram, 998, or 19th &Amacr;b&amacr;n (November, 1589). See also Akbarn&amacr;ma, iii, 568.</note> of Zain &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka, who, in point of affinity, was on the same footing<note n=2>I.e., both were Akbar&apos;s foster-brothers.</note> as Mirz&amacr; &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka, in the 34th year of my father&apos;s reign, in the city of Kabul, two years and two months after the birth of &Khbarb;usrau. After several other children had been born to me and had been received into God&apos;s mercy, a daughter was born of Karams&imacr;,<note n=3>Price, p. 20, has Karmitty, and says the daughter only lived two months. Karams&imacr; appears twice in the Akbarn&amacr;ma as the name of a man; see Akbarn&amacr;ma, ii, 261, and iii, 201. The name may mean &lsquo;composed of kindness.&rsquo; The statement in Price is wrong. Bih&amacr;r B&amacr;n&umacr; was married to &Tumlb;ahmura&sumlb; s. Prince D&amacr;niy&amacr;l in his 20th year (see T&umacr;zuk, M. H&amacr;d&imacr;&apos;s continuation, p. 400). According to M. H&amacr;d&imacr;&apos;s preface, Karams&imacr; was the daughter of R&amacr;ja Kesho D&amacr;s R&amacr;thor, and her daughter Bih&amacr;r B&amacr;n&umacr; was born on 23rd &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war, 998 (September, 1590). Kesho D&amacr;s R&amacr;&tdotb;hor is probably the Kesho D&amacr;s M&amacr;r&umacr; of the T&umacr;zuk.</note> who belonged to the R&amacr;&tdotb;hor clan, and the child received the name of Bih&amacr;r B&amacr;n&umacr; Begam. To Jagat Gos&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;n,<note n=4>Best known as Jodh B&amacr;&imacr; (Blochmann, p. 619).</note> daughter of the Mota Raja (the fat raja), was born Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram, in the 36th year of my father&apos;s reign, corresponding to <hi rend=sc>A.H.</hi> 999,<note n=5>It is extraordinary that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r should have put &Shbarb;&amacr;h-Jah&amacr;n&apos;s birth into <hi rend=sc>A.H.</hi> 999. The I.O. MSS. support the text, but the R.A.S. MS. has <hi rend=sc>A.H.</hi> 1000, which is without doubt right. Cf. Akbarn&amacr;ma, Bib. Ind., iii, 603. Later on, a great point was made of his having been born in a millennium. The date is 5th January, 1592.</note> in the city of Lahore. His advent made the world joyous (<hi>&khbarb;urram</hi>),<note n=6>Mu&hdotb;ammad H&amacr;d&imacr; says in his preface, p. 6, that &Shbarb;&amacr;h-Jah&amacr;n&apos;s grandfather Akbar gave him the name of Sultan &Khbarb;urram, &lsquo;Prince Joy,&rsquo; because his birth made the world glad. It was noted that the child was born in the first millennium, and also that, like his father, he was born in the same month as the Prophet.</note> <pb id=pb20 n=20>and gradually, as his years increased, so did his excellencies, and he was more attentive to my father than all (my) other children, who was exceedingly pleased with and grateful for his services, and always recommended him to me and frequently told me there was no comparison between him and my other children. He recognised him as his real child.

<p>After that (&Khbarb;urram&apos;s birth) some other children were born who died in infancy, and then within one month two sons were borne by concubines. One of these I called Jah&amacr;nd&amacr;r and the other &Shbarb;ahry&amacr;r.<note n=1>Gladwin says they were twins, but this seems a mistake. They were both born about the time of Akbar&apos;s death.</note>

<p>About this time there came a petition from Sa&ayin;id &Khbarb;&amacr;n with regard to granting leave to M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;, who was a son of the ruler of the province of Thathah (Tattah in Sind).<note n=2>In MS. No. 310 of Ethé&apos;s Cat. of I.O. MSS. Sa&ayin;id &Khbarb;&amacr;n is described as giving as his reason for asking for M. &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; that he had adopted him as his son. Price&apos;s Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, p. 21, says the same thing.</note> I said that as my father had betrothed his sister to my son &Khbarb;usrau, please God, when this alliance came into force, I would give him leave to return to Sind.

<p>A year before I became king I had determined that I would drink no wine on Friday eve, and I hope at the throne of God that He will keep me firm in this resolve as long as I live.

<p>Twenty thousand rupees were given to M&imacr;rz&amacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad Ri&zdotb;&amacr; Sabzw&amacr;r&imacr; to divide amongst the faqirs and the needy of Delhi. The viziership of my dominions I gave in the proportions of half and half to &Khbarb;&amacr;n Beg,<note n=3>This should be J&amacr;n, and is so in I.O. MS. 181.</note> to whom when I was prince I had given the title of Waz&imacr;ru-l-mulk, and to Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n<note n=4>See Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, iii, 932. The meaning of the half and half is that the two men were made coadjutors.</note> (Muq&imacr;m), and I gave to &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Far&imacr;d Bu&khbarb;&amacr;r&imacr;, who held the rank of 4,000, that of 5,000. <pb id=pb21 n=21>I promoted R&amacr;m D&amacr;s Kachhw&amacr;ha, whom my father had favoured, and who held the rank of 2,000, to that of 3,000. I sent dresses of honour to M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Hdotb;usain and grandson of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Ism&amacr;&ayin;&imacr;l, the ruler of Qandahar, and to &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n, son of Bair&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and to &Imacr;raj and D&amacr;r&amacr;b, his sons, and to other nobles attached to the Deccan (command). Bar&khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;r, son of &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;m&amacr;n, son of Mu&hamza;ayyid Beg, as he had come to court without a summons, I ordered back to his jagir. <note n=1>In R.A.S. and I.O. MSS. the following passage is a verse. See also Mr. Lowe&apos;s translation, p. 16.</note>It is not according to good manners to go to the king&apos;s banquet without a summons, otherwise there would be no forbidding of the doors and walls to the foot of desire.

<p>A month had elapsed after my auspicious accession when L&amacr;la Beg, who while I was prince had obtained the title of B&amacr;z Bah&amacr;dur, obtained the blessing of waiting on me. His rank, which had been 1,500, was raised to 4,000. I promoted him to the Subah of Bihar and gave him 2,000 rupees. B&amacr;z Bah&amacr;dur is of the lineage of the special attendants of our family; his father&apos;s name was Ni&zumlb;&amacr;m, and he was librarian to Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n. Kesho D&amacr;s M&amacr;r&umacr;, who is a R&amacr;jp&umacr;t of the province of Mairtha and is greater in loyalty than his contemporaries, I promoted to the rank of 1,500. I directed the <hi>&ayin;ulam&amacr;</hi> and the learned men of Islam to collect those of the distinctive appellations of God which were easy to remember, in order that I might make them into my rosary<note n=2><hi>Wird</hi> means &lsquo;daily practice,&rsquo; and may be the word intended here.</note> (<hi>ward</hi>). On Friday eves<note n=3>Cf. this with the fuller details in Price, p. 22. Following Blochmann, I take &Shbarb;ab-i-jum&ayin;a to mean Thursday and not Friday night.</note> I associate with learned and pious men, and with dervishes and recluses. When Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was one of the old retainers of the State in my revered father&apos;s reign, was appointed to the government of the province of Gujarat, I presented him with a lakh of rupees for his expenses. I raised M&imacr;r&amacr;n <pb id=pb22 n=22>&Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n from the rank of 2,000 to that of 4,000. I knew him in my childhood when I read the &ldquo;Forty Sayings&rdquo; with &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &ayin;Abdu-n-Nab&imacr;,<note n=1>The text has &ayin;Abdu-l-&Ghbarb;an&imacr;, but this, as the MSS. show and Blochmann has pointed out, is a mistake for &ayin;Abdu-n-Nab&imacr;. &ayin;Abdu-n-Nab&imacr; was strangled, and the common report is that this was done by Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l. If this be true it is rather surprising that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r does not mention it as an excuse for killing Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l. Cf. the account of M&imacr;r&amacr;n &Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n in Price, p. 24. The &ldquo;Forty Sayings&rdquo; is a book by J&amacr;m&imacr;. See Rieu, Cat. i, 17, and also Dr. Herbelot s.v. <hi>Arbain</hi>.</note> whose history is given in detail in the Akbarn&amacr;ma. From these early days till now M&imacr;r&amacr;n &Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n has acted towards me with single-minded loyalty, and I regard him as my preceptor in religions matters (<hi>&khbarb;al&imacr;fa</hi>). Whilst I was prince and before my revered father&apos;s illness, and during that time, when the ministers (pillars of the State) and the high nobles had become agitated, and each had conceived some idea of gain for himself and wished to become the originator of some act which could only bring ruin on the State, he had not failed in the activity of his service and devotedness. Having made &ayin;In&amacr;yat Beg,<note n=2>This should be &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb; Beg. He was father of N&umacr;rjah&amacr;n. According to the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr; (i, 129), he was commander of 1,000 under Akbar.</note> who for a long period in the reign of my father had been Master of Works (<hi>D&imacr;w&amacr;n-i-buy&umacr;t&amacr;t</hi>) and held the rank of 700, half-vizier of my dominions in the place of Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, I gave him the high title of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daula with the rank of 1,500, and I appointed Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n to the <hi>D&imacr;w&amacr;n&imacr;</hi> of the province of Bengal, and assigned to him the settlement of the revenues thereof. To Patr D&amacr;s, who in the time of my father had the title of R&amacr;y R&amacr;y&amacr;n, I gave the title of Raja Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t. The latter was one of the great Rajas of India, and it was in his reign that astronomical observatories were established in India. I made Patr D&amacr;s Master of Ordnance, and ordered that he should always have light artillery<note n=3><hi>Top&khbarb;&amacr;na-i-rik&amacr;b</hi>, lit. stirrup-arsenal. It means light artillery that could accompany royal progresses. See Bernier, and Irvine, A. of M., 134.</note> in the <pb id=pb23 n=23>arsenal, 50,000 light guns<note n=1>Text, <hi>topch&imacr;</hi>, which seems properly to mean a gunner, but the number is preposterous. Cf. Blochmann, p. 470, and Price, p. 28. Price&apos;s original has 6,000 <hi>topch&imacr;</hi> mounted on camels, and has <hi>p&amacr;yta&khbarb;t</hi>, i.e. the capital. Erskine has &ldquo;To have always in readiness in the arsenal arms, and accoutrements for 50,000 matchlock men.&rdquo; This seems reasonable, for even if Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r ordered 50,000 musketeers, he would not have required them to be kept in the arsenal. It seems to me that though <hi>ch&imacr;</hi> in <corr sic=Turki>Turk&imacr;</corr> is the sign of the agent (<hi lang=la>nomen agentis</hi>) it is occasionally used by Indian writers as a diminutive. Thus <hi>topch&imacr;</hi> here probably means a small gun or a musket, and in Hindustani we are familiar with the word <hi>chilamch&imacr;</hi>, which means a small basin. At p. 301 of the T&umacr;zuk, four lines from foot, we have the word <hi>&imacr;lch&imacr;</hi>, which commonly means an ambassador&mdash;an agent of a people&mdash;used certainly not in this sense, and apparently to mean a number of horses. It is, however, doubtful if <hi>&imacr;lch&imacr;</hi> here be the true reading.</note> and 3,000 gun-carriages, ready and in efficient order. He was a <hi>khatr&imacr;</hi> by caste, and rose in my father&apos;s service from being accountant of the elephants&apos; stables to be diwan and an amir. He is not wanting in military qualities and in administrative skill. I made &Khbarb;urram, the son of &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am (&ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka), who had had the rank of 2,000, an officer of 2,500.

<p>As it was my desire that many of the Akbar&imacr; and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; officers should obtain the fruition of their wishes, I informed the bakhshis that whoever wished to have his birthplace made into his jagir should make a representation to that effect, so that in accordance with the Ching&imacr;z canon (<hi>t&umacr;ra</hi>) the estate might be conveyed to him by <hi>&amacr;l tam&ghbarb;&amacr;</hi> and become his property, and he might be secured from apprehension of change. Our ancestors and forefathers were in the habit of granting jagirs to everyone under proprietary title, and adorned the farmans for these with the <hi>&amacr;l tam&ghbarb;&amacr;</hi> seal, which is an impressed seal made in vermilion (i.e. red ink). I ordered that they should cover the place for the seal, with gold-leaf (<hi>&tumlb;il&amacr;po&shbarb;</hi>) and impress the seal thereon, and I called this the <hi>alt&umacr;n</hi><note n=2>Text, <hi>akn&umacr;n</hi> (now), which is a mistake for <hi>alt&umacr;n</hi> (gold). See Elliot and Dowson, vi, 288. <hi>&Amacr;l</hi> is vermilion in Turk&imacr; and <hi>alt&umacr;n</hi> gold. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r means that he changed the name from <hi>&amacr;l tam&ghbarb;&amacr;</hi> to <hi>alt&umacr;n tam&ghbarb;&amacr;</hi>.</note> <hi>tam&ghbarb;&amacr;</hi>.

<pb id=pb24 n=24><p>I had selected from the other sons of &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, M&imacr;rz&amacr; Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n,<note n=1>M&imacr;rz&amacr; Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n was great-grandson of Sulaim&amacr;n.</note> son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb; the grandson of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Sulaim&amacr;n, who was a descendant (great-grandson) of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ab&umacr; Sa&ayin;&imacr;d and for a long time ruler of Badakhshan, and with consent of my<note n=2>Perhaps the reference is to the boy&apos;s own father. He was alive at this time, and Akbar was not.</note> revered father brought him into my service. I count him as a son, and have promoted him to the rank of 1,000. I also promoted Bh&amacr;o Singh, son of Raja M&amacr;n Singh and the most capable of his sons, from his original rank to that of 1,500. I raised Zam&amacr;na Beg,<note n=3>This is the man who afterwards rebelled and made Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r his prisoner.</note> son of &Ghbarb;ay&umacr;r Beg of Kabul, who has served me personally from his childhood, and who, when I was prince, rose from the grade of an ahadi to that of 500, giving him the title of Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n and the rank of 1,500. He was confirmed as bakhshi of my private establishment (<hi>&shbarb;&amacr;gird-p&imacr;&shbarb;a</hi>).

<p>I promoted Raja B&imacr;r Singh Deo, a Bandela Rajput, who had obtained my favour, and who excels his equals and relatives in valour, personal goodness, and simple-heartedness, to the rank of 3,000. The reason for his advancement and for the regard shown to him was that near the end of my revered father&apos;s time, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l, who excelled the &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;z&amacr;das of Hindustan in wisdom and learning, had adorned himself outwardly with the jewel of sincerity, and sold it to my father at a heavy price. He had been summoned from the Deccan, and, since his feelings towards me were not honest, he both publicly and privately spoke against me. At this period when, through strife-exciting intriguers, the august feelings of my royal father were entirely embittered against me, it was certain that if he obtained the honour of waiting on him (Akbar) it would be the cause of more confusion, and would preclude me <pb id=pb25 n=25>from the favour of union with him (my father). It became necessary to prevent him from coming to Court. As B&imacr;r Singh Deo&apos;s country was exactly on his route and he was then a rebel, I sent him a message that if he would stop that sedition-monger and kill him he would receive every kindness from me. By God&apos;s grace, when &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l was passing through B&imacr;r Singh Deo&apos;s country, the Raja blocked his road, and after a little contest scattered his men and killed him. He sent his head to me in Allahabad. Although this event was a cause of anger in the mind of the late king (Akbar), in the end it enabled me to proceed without disturbance of mind to kiss the threshold of my father&apos;s palace, and by degrees the resentment of the king was cleared away.

<p>I made M&imacr;r &Zdotb;iy&amacr;&hamza;u-d-d&imacr;n of Qazw&imacr;n, who had done me service in the days of my princehood and had shown loyalty, commander of 1,000 and accountant of the stables. An order was given that every day thirty horses should be produced before me for the purpose of making presents. I honoured M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; Akbar&shbarb;&amacr;h&imacr;, who is one of the distinguished braves of this family,<note n=1>Text, <hi>ul&umacr;s-i-Dihli</hi>. Blochmann (p. 482 n.) points out that this is a very doubtful term, as M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; came from Badakhshan. On examining three MSS. of the T&umacr;zuk-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; I find no word <hi>Dihli</hi>, but the words <hi>&imacr;n ul&umacr;s</hi>, &lsquo;this tribe or family,&rsquo; and I think this must be the correct reading, and refers to the Timurides. The same phrase occurs at text, p. 173. Blochmann suggests to read <hi>D&umacr;ld&amacr;y</hi> for <hi>Dihli</hi>, but I think it more probable that the word <hi>Dihli</hi> should be <hi>&ayin;&amacr;l&imacr;</hi>. M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; was styled <hi>Akbar&shbarb;&amacr;h&imacr;</hi>, and no doubt this is why Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r writes <hi>&imacr;n ul&umacr;s</hi> or <hi>ul&umacr;s-i-&ayin;&amacr;l&imacr;</hi>. M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; is often mentioned in the Akbarn&amacr;ma in connection with the wars in the Deccan, and is generally called Akbar&shbarb;&amacr;h&imacr;, e.g. at p. 702. For an account of his pathetic death see Blochmann, l.c., the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, iii, 357, and the text, p. 163.</note> with the rank of 4,000, and gave him the sarkar of Sambhal as his jagir.

<p>One day the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; (&Shbarb;ar&imacr;f &Khbarb;&amacr;n) greatly pleased me by an incidental remark. It was this: &ldquo;Honesty and dishonesty are not confined to matters of cash and goods; to represent qualities as existing in acquaintances which <pb id=pb26 n=26>do not exist, and to conceal the meritorious qualities of strangers, is dishonesty. In truth, honesty of speech consists in making no distinction between intimates and strangers and in describing each man as he really is.&rdquo;

<p>When I sent off Parw&imacr;z I had said to him, &ldquo;If the R&amacr;n&amacr; himself, and his eldest son who is called Karan, should come to wait upon you and proffer service and obedience, you should not do any injury to his territory.&rdquo; My intention in this recommendation was of two kinds; one, that inasmuch as the conquest of Transoxiana was always in the pure mind of my revered father, though every time he determined on it things occurred to prevent it, if this business could be settled, and this danger dismissed from my mind, I would leave Parw&imacr;z in Hindustan, and in reliance on Allah, myself start for my hereditary territories, especially as at this time there was no permanent ruler in that region. B&amacr;q&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who, after &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n and &ayin;Abdu-l-Mu&hamza;m&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n, his son, had acquired complete independence, had died, and the affairs of Wal&imacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Khbarb;&amacr;n, his brother, who is now the ruler of that region, had not as yet been brought into proper order. Secondly, to bring about the termination of the war in the Deccan, of which a part in the time of my revered father had been acquired, so that it might come into possession, and be incorporated with the Imperial dominions. My hope is that through the favour of Allah both these undertakings will be accomplished.

<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Though a king should seize the seven climes,<note n=1>The MSS. have a different reading, &ldquo;If a king seize country and climes,&rdquo; etc.</note>
    <l>He still would labour to take others.&rdquo;
</lg>

<p>I promoted M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;,<note n=2>&Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb; was married to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s half-sister, &Shbarb;akaru-n-nis&amacr;. He was a Timurid.</note> grandson of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Sulaim&amacr;n, (once) the ruler of Badakhshan, who was nearly related to <pb id=pb27 n=27>my family, and held the rank of 5,000 in my father&apos;s service, to the rank of 7,000. The M&imacr;rz&amacr; is a true Turk in disposition and simple-minded. My father conferred great honour on him, and whenever he bade his own sons sit he gratified him also with this distinction. Notwithstanding the mischievous propensities of the people of Badakhshan, the M&imacr;rz&amacr; in this familiarity never left the right road, or undertook anything that might lead to unpleasantness. I confirmed him in the Subah of Malwa just as my father had kindly conferred it on him.

<p>I conferred on &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &ayin;Abdu-llah, who is of the Naq&shbarb;band&imacr; family, and in the commencement of his service was an ahadi, and who had risen by degrees to the command of 1,000, but without reason had gone into my father&apos;s service, the rank and jagir my father had conferred on him. Although I considered it best for my own prosperity that my attendants and people should go into his (Akbar&apos;s) service, yet this had occurred without my leave, and I was rather annoyed at it. But the fact is that he is a manly and zealous man; if he had not committed this fault he would have been a faultless hero (<hi>jaw&amacr;n</hi>).

<p>Ab&umacr;-n-nab&imacr;,<note n=1>The MSS. have Ab&umacr;-l-wal&imacr;, and this seems more likely.</note> the &Umacr;zbeg, who is one of the distinguished inhabitants of M&amacr;war&amacr;&hamza;a-n-nahr and in the time of &ayin;Abdu-l-Mu&hamza;m&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n was governor of Mashhad, obtained the rank of 1,500.

<p>&Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;asan is the son of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Bah&amacr;.<note n=2>The MSS. have Bh&imacr;n&amacr;, and Price&apos;s original seems also to have Bh&imacr;n&amacr;. Muqarrab did not return for about seven months, as this entry could not have been made till then. See p. 35 of Persian text of T&umacr;zuk.</note> From the days of his childhood to this day he has always been in my service and in attendance on me, and when I was prince was distinguished by the title of Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n. He was very active and alert in his service, and in hunting would often traverse long distances by my side. He is <pb id=pb28 n=28>skilful with the arrow and the gun, and in surgery is the most skilful of his time. His ancestors also had been well practised in this profession. After my accession, in consequence of the perfect confidence I had in him, I sent him to Burhanpur to bring the children and dependants of my brother D&amacr;niy&amacr;l to wait on me, and sent a message to the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n in low and high words<note n=1>Text, <hi>Su&khbarb;un&amacr;n-i-past u buland</hi>. Cf. Steingass, s.v. <hi>past</hi>. Words gentle and severe seem meant.</note> and profitable admonitions. Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n performed this service correctly and in a short time, and, clearing off the suspicions which had entered the minds of the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n and the nobles of that place, brought those who had been left behind by my brother in safety and security, together with his establishment and property and effects, to Lahore, and there presented them before me.

<p>I promoted Naq&imacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n,<note n=2>See Blochmann, p. 447. He is mentioned by Du Jarric as disputing with the Catholic priests before Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r (see J.A.S.B. for 1896, p. 77). According to Baday&umacr;n&imacr;, iii, 98, it was Naq&imacr;b&apos;s father, &ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f, with whom Akbar read (see Akbarn&amacr;ma, ii, 19). &ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f and his family arrived in 963 (1556). Erskine understands Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s remark to mean that Naq&imacr;b was his (Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s) teacher, but probably Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r means that it was Naq&imacr;b&apos;s father who taught Akbar, or he has confounded the father and son. As Naq&imacr;b lived till 1023 (1614), he would probably be too young in 1556 to have been Akbar&apos;s teacher.</note> who is one of the genuine Sayyids of Qazw&imacr;n and is called &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n &ayin;Al&imacr;, to the rank of 1,500. My father had distinguished him with the title of Naq&imacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and in his service he had complete intimacy and consideration. Shortly after his accession he (Akbar) had discussed several matters with him, and from this familiarity he called him <hi>&amacr;&khbarb;&umacr;nd</hi>. He has no equal or rival in the science of history and in biographies. There is in this day no chronologist like him in the inhabited world. From the beginning of Creation till the present time, he has by heart the tale of the four quarters of the world. Has Allah granted to any other person such faculty of memory?

<pb id=pb29 n=29><p>&Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Kab&imacr;r, who was of the family of the venerable &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Sal&imacr;m, I had honoured with the title of &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n when I was prince, on account of his manliness and bravery. I now selected him for the rank of 1,000.

<p>On Sha&ayin;b&amacr;n 27th (28th December, 1605) a strange thing was done by the sons of Akhayr&amacr;j, son of Bhagw&amacr;n D&amacr;s, the paternal uncle<note n=1>M&amacr;n Singh was the adopted son of Bhagw&amacr;n D&amacr;s, and it would appear from this passage that he was his nephew also.</note> of Raja M&amacr;n Singh. These unlucky ones, who bore the names of Abhay R&amacr;m, Bijay R&amacr;m, and Shy&amacr;m R&amacr;m, were exceedingly immoderate. Notwithstanding that the aforesaid Abhay R&amacr;m had done improper (disproportioned) acts, I had winked at his faults. When at this date it was represented to me that this wretch was desirous of despatching his wives and children without leave to his own country and afterwards of himself running away to the R&amacr;n&amacr;, who is not loyal to this family, I referred to R&amacr;m D&amacr;s and other Rajput nobles, and said to them that if any one of them would become security for them, I would confirm the rank and jagir of those wretches, and passing over their offences would forgive them. In consequence of their excessive turbulence and bad disposition no one became security. I told the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; that as no one would be bound for them, they must be handed over to the charge of one of the servants of the Court until security was forthcoming. The Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; gave them over to Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n K&amacr;kar, who was afterwards dignified with the title of Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and &Hdotb;&amacr;tim,<note n=2>The MSS. have &Hdotb;&amacr;tim s. B&amacr;b&umacr;&imacr; Mangl&imacr;, and this is right. See Blochmann, p. 370, n. i, and p. 473.</note> second son of Mangl&imacr;, who held the title of &Shbarb;&amacr;hnaw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n.<note n=3>The MSS. have &Shbarb;&amacr;hw&amacr;r.</note> When these wished to disarm these foolish people, they refused, and, not observing the dues of good manners, began, together with their servants, to quarrel and fight. The Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; reported the circumstance to me, and I ordered them to be <pb id=pb30 n=30>punished according to their deeds. He betook himself to driving them off, and I sent &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Far&imacr;d also after him. One Rajput armed with a sword, and another with a dagger stood up to the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr;. One of his attendants named Qu&tumlb;b engaged the man with the dagger and was killed. The Rajput also was cut to pieces. One of the Afghan attendants of the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; attacked the one who had the sword and killed him. Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n drew his dagger and turned towards Abhay R&amacr;m, who with two others was holding his ground, and after wounding one of these fell down after receiving wounds from the three. Some of the ahadis and the men of the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; opposed and slew these doomed men. A Rajput drew his sword and turned to &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Far&imacr;d; he was met by a &Hdotb;ab&shbarb;&imacr; slave, who brought him down. This disturbance took place in the courtyard of the public palace. That punishment served as a warning to many who had not looked to consequences. Ab&umacr;-n-nab&imacr;<note n=1>I.O. MSS. have Ab&umacr;-l-wal&imacr;. He was an &Umacr;zbeg, and received the title of Bah&amacr;dur &Khbarb;&amacr;n. See Ma &amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, i, 400, and Akbarn&amacr;ma, iii, 820 and 839, where he is called Ab&umacr;-l-Baq&amacr;. The real name seems to be Ab&umacr;l Be or Bey, and this is how Erskine writes the name.</note> represented that if such a deed had been done in the &Umacr;zbeg country the whole family and connections of that band of men would have been destroyed. I replied that as these people had been treated kindly and educated by my revered father I carried on the same benevolence to them, and justice demands that many shall not be chastised for the fault of one.

<p>&Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;usain J&amacr;m&imacr;, who now sits on the cushion of <hi>darw&imacr;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> and is one of the disciples of the dervish of Shiraz,<note n=2>The text seems corrupt. The I.O. MSS. say nothing about Shiraz, but merely that &Hdotb;usain J&amacr;m&imacr; was a disciple who had a dervish character (<hi>s&imacr;rat</hi>); nor does the R.A.S. MS. mention Shiraz.</note> had written to me from Lahore six months before my accession that he had seen in a dream that saints and pious men had delivered over the affairs of the kingdom to that <pb id=pb31 n=31>chosen one of the Court of Allah (Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r), and that, rejoicing in this good news, he should await the event, and that he hoped that when it had occurred, the faults of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Zakariyy&amacr;, who was one of the A&hdotb;r&amacr;riyya,<note n=1>That is, descended from the famous Central Asian saint &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja A&hdotb;r&amacr;r.</note> would be pardoned.<note n=2>Something seems to have fallen out of the text and MSS., for this passage is obscure and not connected with the context. It is clearer in Price&apos;s version, where it is brought in as part of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s statements about promotions, and where (p. 40) we read as follows:&mdash;&ldquo;I shall now return to the more grateful subject of recording rewards and advancements.... On &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Zakariyy&amacr;, the son of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Mu&hdotb;ammad Ya&hdotb;y&amacr;, although in disgrace, I conferred the rank of 500. This I was induced to do on the recommendation of the venerated &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;usain J&amacr;m&imacr;. Six months previous to my accession,&rdquo; etc. Evidently the statement about Zakariyy&amacr;&apos;s promotion has been omitted accidentally from the T&umacr;zuk. There is a reference to the &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;&apos;s dream in Mu&hdotb;ammad H&amacr;d&imacr;&apos;s preface to the T&umacr;zuk (p. 15). He says there that it was the saint Bah&amacr;&hamza;u-l-&hdotb;aqq who appeared in a dream to &Hdotb;usain J&amacr;m&imacr; and told him that Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Sal&imacr;m would soon be king.</note>

<p>I conferred on T&amacr;&shbarb; Beg Furj&imacr;,<note n=3>I.e. of Furj or Furg in Persia. But Furj&imacr; is a mistake for Q&umacr;rch&imacr; (belonging to the body-guard). He was a Mogul. See Blochmann, p. 457.</note> who was one of the old servants of the State, and whom my father had honoured with the title of T&amacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and who had the rank of 2,000, that of 3,000, and I raised Tu&khbarb;ta<note n=4>Text has wrongly Pa&khbarb;ta. See Blochmann, p. 469. He received the title of Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n.</note> Beg K&amacr;bul&imacr; from the rank of 2,500 to that of 3,000. He is a brave and active man, and was greatly trusted in the service of my uncle, M&imacr;rz&amacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m. I promoted Ab&umacr;-l-Q&amacr;sim Tamk&imacr;n,<note n=5>Should be Namak&imacr;n. See Blochmann, p. 199.</note> who was one of my father&apos;s old servants, to the rank of 1,500. There are few men such as he for abundance of children; he has thirty sons, and if his daughters do not number so many they must be half that number. I dignified &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &ayin;Al&amacr;&hamza;u-d-d&imacr;n, grandson of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Sal&imacr;m, who had strong connections with me, with the title of Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and promoted him to the rank of <pb id=pb32 n=32>2,000. He had grown up with me from his childhood, and may be a year younger than I. He is a brave and well-dispositioned youth, and is distinguished in every way above his family. Till now he has never drunk intoxicating drinks, and his sincerity towards me is such that I have honoured him with the title of son.

<p>I have bestowed on &ayin;Al&imacr; A&sdotb;&ghbarb;ar B&amacr;rha, who has not a rival in bravery and zeal, and is the son of Sayyid Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n B&amacr;rha, one of my father&apos;s old nobles, the title of Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and thus distinguished him amongst his equals and connections. He is evidently a brave youth. He was always one of the confidential men who went with me to hunt and to other places. He has never in his life drunk anything intoxicating, and as he has abstained in his youth he probably will attain high dignities. I granted him the rank of 3,000.

<p>I promoted Far&imacr;d&umacr;n, son of Mu&hdotb;ammad Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Barl&amacr;s, who held the rank of 1,000, to that of 2,000. Far&imacr;d&umacr;n is one of the tribe of Cha&ghbarb;at&amacr;y, and is not devoid of manliness and courage.

<p>I promoted &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d, grandson of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Sal&imacr;m, who held the rank of 2,000, to that of 3,000. The first person who gave me milk, but for not more than a day, was the mother of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d.

<p><note n=1>This passage has been translated by Elliot (vi, 289). See also Price (p. 44), where the discussion is fuller.</note>One day I observed to the Pandits, that is, the wise men of the Hindus, &ldquo;If the doctrines of your religion are based on the incarnation of the Holy Person of God Almighty in ten different forms by the process of metempsychosis, they are virtually rejected by the intelligent. This pernicious idea requires that the Sublime Cause, who is void of all limitations, should be possessed of length, breadth, and thickness. If the purpose is the manifestation of the Light of God in these bodies, that of itself is existent equally in <pb id=pb33 n=33>all created things, and is not peculiar to these ten forms. If the idea is to establish some one of God&apos;s attributes, even then there is no right notion, for in every faith and code there are masters of wonders and miracles distinguished beyond the other men of their age for wisdom and eloquence.&rdquo;<note n=1>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s idea is somewhat vaguely expressed, but his meaning seems to be that the ten incarnations do not illustrate any attribute of God, for there have been men who performed similar wonders. The corresponding passage in the text used by Major Price is differently rendered by him, but his version is avowedly a paraphrase, and it appears incorrect in this passage.</note> After much argument and endless controversy, they acknowledged a God of Gods, devoid of a body or accidents,<note n=2>Literally, &ldquo;of the How and the Why.&rdquo;</note> and said, &ldquo;As our imagination fails to conceive a formless personality (<hi>&zbarb;&amacr;t-i-mujarrad</hi>), we do not find any way to know Him without the aid of a form. We have therefore made these ten forms the means of conceiving of and knowing Him.&rdquo; Then said I, &ldquo;How can these forms be a means of your approaching the Deity?&rdquo;

<p>My father always associated with the learned of every creed and religion, especially with Pandits and the learned of India, and although he was illiterate, so much became clear to him through constant intercourse with the learned and wise, in his conversations with them, that no one knew him to be illiterate, and he was so acquainted with the niceties of verse and prose compositions that his deficiency was not thought of.

<p>In his august personal appearance he was of middle height, but inclining to be tall; he was of the hue of wheat; his eyes and eyebrows were black, and his complexion rather dark than fair; he was lion-bodied,<note n=3>Text, <hi>&shbarb;&imacr;r-and&amacr;m</hi>, &lsquo;tiger-shaped,&rsquo; which I think means thin in the flank (see Steingass, s.v.). I have taken the translation of the words mal&amacr;&hdotb;at and <hi>&sdotb;ab&amacr;&hdotb;at</hi> from Elliot. See his note vi, 376, where the two words seem wrongly spelt.</note> with a broad chest, and his hands and arms long. On the left side of his nose he had a fleshy mole, very agreeable in appearance, of the size <pb id=pb34 n=34>of half a pea. Those skilled in the science of physiognomy considered this mole a sign of great prosperity and exceeding good fortune. His august voice was very loud, and in speaking and explaining had a peculiar richness. In his actions and movements he was not like the people of the world, and the glory of God manifested itself in him.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Greatness in his manner, kingship in his lineage,
    <l>As if Solomon would have put the ring on his finger.&rdquo;<note n=1>Erskine has &ldquo;Let Sulaim&amacr;n place his ring on his finger.&rdquo;</note>
</lg>


<p>Three months after my birth my sister, &Shbarb;&amacr;hz&amacr;da &Khbarb;&amacr;nam, was born to one of the royal concubines; they gave her over to his (Akbar&apos;s) mother, Maryam Mak&amacr;n&imacr;. After her a son was born to one of the concubines, and received the name of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Mur&amacr;d. As his birth occurred in the hill country of Fat&hdotb;p&umacr;r, he was nicknamed <hi>Pah&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>. When my revered father sent him to conquer the Deccan, he had taken to excessive drinking through associating with unworthy persons, so that he died in his 30th year, in the neighbourhood of J&amacr;ln&amacr;p&umacr;r, in the province of Berar. His personal appearance was fresh-coloured; he was thin in body and tall of stature. Dignity and authority were evident in his movements, and manliness and bravery manifested themselves in his ways. On the night of Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-l-awwal 10th, <hi rend=sc>A.H.</hi> 979 (September, 1572), another son was born to one of the concubines. As his birth took place at Ajm&imacr;r in the house of one of the attendants of the blessed shrine of the reverend &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n Chi&shbarb;t&imacr;, whose name was &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, this child was called D&amacr;niy&amacr;l.

<p>After the death of my brother &Shbarb;&amacr;h Mur&amacr;d, he (Akbar), towards the end of his reign, sent D&amacr;niy&amacr;l to conquer the Deccan and followed him himself. When my revered father was besieging &Amacr;s&imacr;r (&Amacr;s&imacr;rgarh) he, with a large body of nobles such as the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n and his sons and M&imacr;rz&amacr; Y&umacr;suf &Khbarb;&amacr;n, invested the fort of Ahmadnagar, and it came <pb id=pb35 n=35>into the possession of the victorious officers about the time that &Amacr;s&imacr;r was taken. After my father &ayin;Ar&shbarb;-&amacr;&shbarb;y&amacr;n&imacr; had returned in prosperity and victory from Burhanpur towards his capital, he gave the province to D&amacr;niy&amacr;l and left him in possession of that territory. D&amacr;niy&amacr;l took to improper ways, like his brother &Shbarb;&amacr;h Mur&amacr;d, and soon died from excessive drinking, in the 33rd year of his age. His death occurred in a peculiar way. He was very fond of guns and of hunting with the gun. He named one of his guns <hi>yaka u jan&amacr;za</hi>, &lsquo;the same as the bier,&rsquo; and himself composed this couplet and had it engraved on the gun:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;From the joy of the chase with thee, life is fresh and new;
    <l>To everyone whom thy dart strikes, &lsquo;tis the same as his bier.&rdquo;<note n=1>Price translates&mdash;

<q><text><body><lg>
    <l>&ldquo;In pleasure of the chase with thee, my soul breathes fresh and clear;
    <l>But who receives thy fatal dart, sinks lifeless on his bier.&rdquo;
</lg><body></text></q></note></lg>


<p>When his drinking of wine was carried to excess, and the circumstance was reported to my father, farmans of reproach were sent to the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n. Of course he forbade it, and placed cautious people to look after him properly. When the road to bring wine was completely closed, he began to weep and to importune some of his servants, and said: &ldquo;Let them bring me wine in any possible way.&rdquo; He said to Mur&shbarb;id Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, a musketeer who was in his immediate service: &ldquo;Pour some wine into this <hi>yaka u jan&amacr;za</hi>, and bring it to me.&rdquo; That wretch, in hope of favour, undertook to do this, and poured double-distilled spirit into the gun, which had long been nourished on gunpowder and the scent thereof, and brought it. The rust of the iron was dissolved by the strength of the spirit and mingled with it, and the prince no sooner drank of it than he fell down.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;No one should draw a bad omen:<note n=2>Perhaps referring to the name which D&amacr;niy&amacr;l gave to his gun, and which recoiled on himself, but the MSS. and text have <hi>nag&imacr;rad</hi>, and not <hi>bag&imacr;rad</hi>.</note>
    <l>If he does, he draws it for himself.&rdquo;
</lg>


<pb id=pb36 n=36><p>D&amacr;niy&amacr;l was of pleasing figure, of exceedingly agreeable manners and appearance; he was very fond of elephants and horses. It was impossible for him to hear of anyone as having a good horse or elephant and not take it from him. He was fond of Hindi songs, and would occasionally compose verses with correct idiom in the language of the people of India, which were not bad.

<p>After the birth of D&amacr;niy&amacr;l a daughter was born to B&imacr;b&imacr; Daulat-&Shbarb;&amacr;d whom they named &Shbarb;akaru-n-nis&amacr; Begam.<note n=1>The MSS. have &Shbarb;akar-ni&sumlb;&amacr;r, &lsquo;sugar-sprinkling.&rsquo; She lived into &Shbarb;&amacr;h-Jah&amacr;n&apos;s reign.</note> As she was brought up in the skirt of my revered father&apos;s care, she turned out very well. She is of good disposition and naturally compassionate towards all people. From infancy and childhood she has been extremely fond of me, and there can be few such relationships between brother and sister. The first time when, according to the custom of pressing the breast of a child and a drop of milk is perceptible, they pressed my sister&apos;s breast and milk appeared, my revered father said to me: &ldquo;B&amacr;b&amacr;! drink this milk, that in truth this sister may be to thee as a mother.&rdquo; God, the knower of secrets, knows that from that day forward, after I drank that drop of milk, I have felt love for my sister such as children have for their mothers.

<p>After some time another girl was born to this same B&imacr;b&imacr; Daulat-&Shbarb;&amacr;d, and he (Akbar) called her &Amacr;r&amacr;m B&amacr;n&umacr; Begam.<note n=2>She died unmarried in Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s reign.</note> Her disposition was on the whole inclined to excitement and heat. My father was very fond of her, so much so that he described her impolitenesses as politenesses, and in his august sight they, from his great love, did not appear bad. Repeatedly he honoured me by addressing me, and said: &ldquo;B&amacr;b&amacr;! for my sake be as kind as I am, after me, to this sister, who in Hindi phrase is my darling <pb id=pb37 n=37>(that is, dearly cherished). Be affectionate to her and pass over her little impolitenesses and impudences.&rdquo;

<p>The good qualities of my revered father are beyond the limit of approval and the bounds of praise. If books were composed with regard to his commendable dispositions, without suspicion of extravagance, and he be not looked at as a father would be by his son, even then but a little out of much could be said.

<p>Notwithstanding his kingship and his treasures and his buried wealth, which were beyond the scope of counting and imagination, his fighting elephants and Arab horses, he never by a hair&apos;s breadth placed his foot beyond the base of humility before the throne of God, but considered himself the lowest of created beings, and never for one moment forgot God.

<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Always, everywhere, with everyone, and in every circumstance,
    <l>Keep the eye of thy heart secretly fixed on the Beloved.&rdquo;
</lg>

<p>The professors of various faiths had room in the broad expanse of his incomparable sway. This was different from the practice in other realms, for in Persia<note n=1>This must, I think, be the meaning, though according to the wording the statement would seem to be that there is no room for Shias except in Persia. Erskine has &ldquo;None but Shias are tolerated in Persia, Sunnis in R&umacr;m and T&umacr;r&amacr;n, and Hindus in Hindustan.&rdquo;</note> there is room for Shias only, and in Turkey, India, and T&umacr;r&amacr;n there is room for Sunnis only.

<p>As in the wide expanse of the Divine compassion there is room for all classes and the followers of all creeds, so, on the principle that the Shadow<note n=2>Kings are regarded as shadows of God.</note> must have the same properties as the Light, in his dominions, which on all sides were limited only by the salt sea, there was room for the professors of opposite religions, and for beliefs good and bad, and the road to altercation was closed. Sunnis and Shias met in one mosque, and Franks and Jews in one church, and observed their own forms of worship.

<pb id=pb38 n=38><p>He associated with the good of every race and creed and persuasion, and was gracious to all in accordance with their condition and understanding. He passed his nights in wakefulness, and slept little in the day; the length of his sleep during a whole night and day (<hi>nycthemeron</hi>) was not more than a watch and a half. He counted his wakefulness at night as so much added to his life. His courage and boldness were such that he could mount raging, rutting elephants, and subdue to obedience murderous elephants which would not allow their own females near them&mdash;although even when an elephant is bad-tempered he does no harm to the female or his driver&mdash;and which were in a state in which they might have killed their drivers or the females, or not have allowed their approach. He would place himself on a wall or tree near which an elephant was passing that had killed its mahout and broken loose from restraint, and, putting his trust in God&apos;s favour, would throw himself on its back and thus by merely mounting, would bring it under control and tame it. This was repeatedly seen.

<p>He ascended the throne in his 14th year. Hem&umacr;, the infidel whom the Afghan ruler had raised to high station, collected a wonderful force after King Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n&apos;s death with a stud of elephants such as no ruler of Hindustan had at that time, and he went towards Delhi. Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n had appointed Akbar to drive off some of the Afghans from the foot-hills of the Panjab, but just then he exemplified the hemistich which is a description of the accident and the chronogram of his death&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;The august monarch (Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n) fell from the roof. The news (of the death) was conveyed to my father by Na&zumlb;ar-j&imacr;v&imacr;.&rdquo;<note n=1>The chronogram is one year short, yielding 962 instead of 963.</note>
</lg>


<p>Bair&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was then his tutor, having collected the nobles who were in the province, chose an auspicious <pb id=pb39 n=39>hour and seated him on the throne of rule in pargana Kal&amacr;n&umacr;r, near Lahore.

<p>When Hem&umacr; reached the neighbourhood of Delhi, Tard&imacr; Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n and a large force that was in the city drew up to oppose him. When the preparations for the combat had been made the armies attacked one another, and, after considerable endeavours and strife, defeat fell on Tard&imacr; Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n and the Moguls, and the army of darkness overcame the army of light.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;All things and battles and fights are of God,
    <l>He knows whose will be the victory.
    <l>From the blood of the brave and the dust of the troops,
    <l>The earth grew red and the heavens black.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>Tard&imacr; Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n and the other defeated ones took the road to my revered father&apos;s camp. As Bair&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n disliked Tard&imacr; Beg, he made this defeat an excuse to put him to death.

<p>A second time, through the pride engendered in the mind of this accursed infidel by his victory, he came out of Delhi with his force and elephants and advanced, while the glorious standards of His Majesty (Akbar) proceeded from Kal&amacr;n&umacr;r for the purpose of driving him away. The armies of darkness and light met in the neighbourhood of Panipat, and on Thursday, Mu&hdotb;arram 2nd, A.H. 964 (November 5th, 1556), a fight took place. In the army of Hem&umacr; were 30,000 brave fighting horsemen, while the <hi>&ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;s</hi> of the victorious army were not more than 4,000 or 5,000. On that day Hem&umacr; was riding an elephant named Haw&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;. Suddenly an arrow struck the eye of that infidel and came out at the back of his head. His army, on seeing this, took to flight. By chance &Shbarb;&amacr;h Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;ram with a few brave men came up to the elephant on which was the wounded Hem&umacr;, and would have shot an arrow at the driver, but he cried &ldquo;Do not kill me; Hem&umacr; is on this elephant.&rdquo; A number of men immediately conveyed Hem&umacr; as he was to the king (Akbar). Bair&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n represented <pb id=pb40 n=40>that it would be proper if the king with his own hand should strike the infidel with a sword, so that obtaining the reward of a &ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; (warrior of the Faith) he might use this title on the imperial farmans. The king answered, &ldquo;I have cut him in pieces before this,&rdquo; and explained: &ldquo;One day, in Kabul, I was copying a picture in presence of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja&ayin;Abdu-&sdotb;-&Sdotb;amad &Shbarb;&imacr;r&imacr;n Qalam, when a form appeared from my brush, the parts of which were separate and divided from each other. One of those near asked, &lsquo;Whose picture is this?&rsquo; It came to my tongue to say that it was the likeness of Hem&umacr;.&rdquo; Not defiling his hand with his (Hem&umacr;&apos;s) blood, he told one of his servants to cut off his head. Those killed in the defeated army numbered 5,000 in addition to those who fell in various places round about.

<p>Another of the well-known deeds of Akbar was the victorious expedition against Gujarat, and his rapid march there, at the time when M&imacr;rz&amacr; Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Hdotb;usain, Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain M&imacr;rz&amacr;, and &Shbarb;&amacr;h M&imacr;rz&amacr; revolted from this State and went towards Gujarat, and all the nobles of that province, combining with the turbulent of those parts, besieged the fort of Ahmadabad in which was M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka with the royal army. His Majesty, in consequence of the distracted state of J&imacr;j&imacr; Ang&amacr;, the mother of the last-named M&imacr;rz&amacr;, started for Gujarat with a body of royal troops without delay from the capital of Fat&hdotb;p&umacr;r. Having covered in the space of nine days the long road which it should take two months to accomplish, sometimes on horseback, sometimes on a camel or in a bullock-cart, he arrived at Sarn&amacr;l.

<p>When, on 5th Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-l-awwal, 980 (September 15th, 1572), he reached the neighbourhood of the enemy&apos;s camp, he consulted with those who were loyal to him. Some said he should make a night attack on the camp. His Majesty, however, said that a night attack was the resort of the faint-hearted and the way of the deceitful, and immediately gave orders to beat the drums and set the horsemen <pb id=pb41 n=41>at them. When the river S&amacr;bar Mah&imacr; (S&amacr;barmat&imacr;) was reached, he ordered his men to cross it in order. Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain M&imacr;rz&amacr; was agitated by the noise of the army of victory, and himself came forward to reconnoitre. Sub&hdotb;&amacr;n Qul&imacr; Turk, also with a troop of brave men, went to the river&apos;s bank to enquire into the enemy&apos;s position. The M&imacr;rz&amacr; asked what troops these were. Sub&hdotb;&amacr;n Qul&imacr; replied that they were of the army of King Jal&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n Akbar. That ill-fated one would not believe this, and said his spies had seen the king fourteen days before in Fat&hdotb;p&umacr;r, and that it was clear Sub&hdotb;&amacr;n Qul&imacr; was lying. To this Sub&hdotb;&amacr;n Qul&imacr; rejoined, &ldquo;Nine days ago the king with this expedition started from Fat&hdotb;p&umacr;r.&rdquo; &ldquo;How could elephants have come?&rdquo;<note n=1>According to the &Tumlb;abaq&amacr;t, Elliot, v, 366, what the M&imacr;rz&amacr; said was &ldquo;Where are the elephants?&rdquo;</note> asked the M&imacr;rz&amacr;. &ldquo;What need was there of elephants?&rdquo; answered Sub&hdotb;&amacr;n Qul&imacr;. &ldquo;Young men and heroes who cleave rocks, and are better than famous and raging elephants, have come; the difference between loyalty and sedition will now become known.&rdquo; The M&imacr;rz&amacr;, after this conversation, turned aside and began to marshal his troops. The king waited until his advanced guard sent word that the enemy had put on their armour. He then moved forward, and although he sent several times to order the &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am to advance, the latter stood still. It was said to Akbar that, as the enemy was in force, it would be well to remain on his side of the river until the army of Gujarat arrived from within the fort. His Majesty answered: &ldquo;Always, and especially in this affair, I have put my trust in God. If I had considered routine, I should not have come in this rapid manner. Now that our foe is ready for the fight, we ought not to delay.&rdquo; With these words, and with his innate reliance on God as his shield, he put his horse into the river with a few chosen men whom he had appointed to ride with him. Though it was not supposed <pb id=pb42 n=42>that there was a ford, he crossed in safety. He had called for his helmet, but in the agitation of bringing it his armour-bearer dropped the face-guard (<hi>buffe</hi>). His comrades did not regard this as a good omen, but he said at once, &ldquo;It is an excellent omen, for it has revealed my face.&rdquo;<note n=1>The word for &lsquo;face-guard&rsquo; is <hi>p&imacr;sh-r&umacr;y</hi> (front-face), and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r makes his father pun upon the word, saying, &ldquo;It has loosed (opened) my front-face.&rdquo; Cf. Price, p. 54.</note> Meantime the wretched M&imacr;rz&amacr; arrayed his ranks to fight his benefactor.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;If thou come out (to fight) with thy benefactor,
    <l>If thou wert the sphere, thou wouldest be reversed.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>The &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am had had no idea that the king would cast the shadow of his compassion on these regions with such speed and eagerness, and he believed no one who gave him news of that arrival, until convinced by visible proof. Then, arraying the army of Gujarat, he prepared to march. Meanwhile &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n also sent news to him. Before his army issued from the fort the enemy had appeared from amongst the trees. The king, taking the Divine aid as the security of his courage, started off. Mu&hdotb;ammad Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Turk and Tard&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n D&imacr;w&amacr;na came forward with a band of brave followers, and after a little fighting turned rein. On this His Majesty said to Bhagw&amacr;n D&amacr;s, &ldquo;The enemy are unnumbered and we are few; we must attack with one face and one heart; for a clenched fist is more useful than an open hand.&rdquo; With these words he drew his sword, and with shout of <hi>Allahu-akbar</hi> and <hi>Y&amacr; Mu&ayin;&imacr;n</hi><note n=2>&lsquo;The helper.&rsquo; This is an allusion to Akbar&apos;s patron saint, Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n Chi&sdotb;ht&imacr;, whose name he adopted as his battle-cry.</note> charged with those devoted to him.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;The sense of the age evaporated with the clamour,
    <l>The ear of the heavens was split with the shouts.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>The royal right and left wings and a band of brave men in the centre fought with valour. Stars (<hi>kaukab&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;</hi>), which are a kind of firework, were lighted by the enemy; they <pb id=pb43 n=43>twisted about among the thorn-bushes, and created such confusion that a noted elephant of the enemy began to move and threw their troops into disarray. With this the royal centre came up and dispersed Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain and his force. M&amacr;n Singh Darb&amacr;r&imacr; overcame his foe under the king&apos;s eyes, and R&amacr;gho D&amacr;s Kachhw&amacr;ha sacrificed his life. Mu&hdotb;ammad Waf&amacr;, who was of the house-born of the State, behaving very bravely, fell wounded from his horse. By the favour of the Creator who cherishes His servants, and simply through the courage and good fortune of the exalted king, the enemy were scattered and defeated. In gratitude for this great victory the king turned his face in supplication to the throne of his merciful Maker, and poured forth his thanks.

<p>One of the kal&amacr;wants (musicians) represented to His Majesty that Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n Kokalt&amacr;&shbarb; had offered the coin of his life in loyalty to the State, and on enquiry it appeared that when Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain M&imacr;rz&amacr; with some of his riffraff was attacking the centre Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n met him and fighting valiantly became a martyr. The M&imacr;rz&amacr; himself was wounded by the hands of the brave men of the main body. The Kokalt&amacr;&shbarb; mentioned is the elder brother of Zain &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka.

<p>A strange circumstance was this: on the day before the battle, when the king was eating, he asked Haz&amacr;ra, who was learned in the science of looking at the shoulder-blades (a kind of divination), to see on whose side the victory would be. Haz&amacr;ra said: &ldquo;The victory will be on your side, but one of the chiefs of your army will become a martyr.&rdquo; Whereupon Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka said &ldquo;Would that this blessing might fall to my lot!&rdquo;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Many an omen that we have treated as jest<note n=1>The reading in the lithograph seems wrong; the MSS. have <hi>az b&amacr;z&imacr;cha</hi>, &lsquo;in jest.&rsquo;</note>
    <l>Became true when the star passed by.&rdquo;
</lg>


<pb id=pb44 n=44><p>In short, M&imacr;rz&amacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain turned his reins, but his horse&apos;s feet became entangled in the thorn-brake and he fell. An ahadi of the king, Gad&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; by name, found him, and having mounted him before him on his horse took him to the king. As two or three claimed a share in his capture, His Majesty asked who had made him prisoner. &ldquo;The king&apos;s salt,&rdquo; he answered. The king ordered his hands, that had been fastened behind him, to be tied in front. Meanwhile he asked for water. Far&hdotb;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was one of the confidential slaves, struck him on the head, but the king, disapproving of this, sent for his private drinking water and satisfied his thirst. Up to this time M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka and the garrison of the fort had not come out. After the capture of the M&imacr;rz&amacr;, His Majesty was proceeding slowly towards Ahmadabad. He had delivered the M&imacr;rz&amacr; to R&amacr;y R&amacr;y Singh R&amacr;&tdotb;hor, one of the Rajput chiefs, to be put on an elephant and brought with him. Meanwhile I&khbarb;tiy&amacr;ru-l-mulk, who was one of the influential Gujarati leaders, made his appearance with an army of nearly 5,000 men. Complete confusion fell upon the royal troops. The king, as his natural valour and lofty disposition required, ordered the drums to be beaten, and Shaj&amacr;&hamza;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, R&amacr;ja Bhagw&amacr;n D&amacr;s, and some others charged on in front to fight this force. Fearing that the enemy might get possession of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain, R&amacr;y R&amacr;y Singh&apos;s men, by the advice and plan of the aforesaid Raja (Bhagw&amacr;n D&amacr;s), cut off his head. My father did not want to kill him. The forces of I&khbarb;tiy&amacr;ru-l-mulk also were dispersed, and he was thrown from his horse into the thorn thicket. Suhr&amacr;b Beg Turkm&amacr;n cut off his head and brought it in. It was only by the grace and power of God that such a victory was won by a small number of men.

<p>In the same way are beyond all reckoning the conquest of the province of Bengal, the capture of well-known and celebrated forts in Hindustan such as Chitor and Ran&tdotb;ambhor, the subjection of the province of Khandesh, and the <pb id=pb45 n=45>taking of the fort of &Amacr;s&imacr;r and of other provinces which by the exertions of the royal armies came into the possession of the servants of the State. If these were related in detail it would be a long story.

<p>In the fight at Chitor, the king with his own hand killed Jitmal, the leader of the men in the fort. He had no rival in shooting with a gun, and with the one with which he killed Jitmal, and which was called Sangr&amacr;m, he killed some 3,000 or 4,000 birds and beasts.<note n=1>Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l is more moderate; he says (Blochmann, p. 116) that Akbar killed 1,019 animals with Sangr&amacr;m.</note> I may be reckoned a true pupil of his. Of all sports I am most disposed to that with the gun, and in one day have shot eighteen deer.

<p>Of the austerities practised by my revered father, one was the not eating the flesh of animals. During three months of the year he ate meat, and for the remaining nine contented himself with &Sdotb;&umacr;f&imacr; food, and was no way pleased with the slaughter of animals. On many days and in many months this was forbidden to the people. The days and months on which he did not eat flesh are detailed in the Akbarn&amacr;ma.

<p>On the day I made I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-l-mulk diwan, I put Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk in charge of the <hi>d&imacr;w&amacr;n&imacr;-i-buy&umacr;t&amacr;t</hi> (care of buildings). The latter is a Sayyid of B&amacr;&khbarb;arz,<note n=2>Blochmann says, of Mashhad, p. 381.</note> and under my revered father was accountant of the <hi>kurkar&amacr;q</hi> department.<note n=3>The furriery. See Blochmann, pp. 87 n. and 616. <hi>Kurk</hi> means &lsquo;fur&rsquo; in Turki.</note>

<p>On one of my accession days, a hundred of the Akbar&imacr; and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; servants were promoted to higher rank and jagirs. At the commencement of the Rama&zdotb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Imacr;d, as it was the first after my accession, I came down to the &ayin;&Imacr;dg&amacr;h from my auspicious throne. There was a great crowd, and having performed the dues of thanksgiving and praise <pb id=pb46 n=46>I returned to the palace, where according to the verse &ldquo;From the table of kings favours come to beggars,&rdquo; I commanded a sum of money to be spent in alms and charity. Some lakhs of d&amacr;ms of this were entrusted to D&umacr;st Mu&hdotb;ammad (afterwards &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n), who divided them amongst faqirs and those who were in want, and a lakh of d&amacr;ms each was given to Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain Anj&umacr; (the lexicographer), M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n, and M&imacr;r Mu&hdotb;ammad Ri&zdotb;&amacr; Sabzaw&amacr;r&imacr; to dispose of in charity in different quarters of the city. I sent 5,000 rupees to the dervishes of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain J&amacr;m&imacr;, and gave directions that each day one of the officers of the watch<note n=1>The word <hi>y&amacr;tish</hi> is omitted in text, but occurs in the MSS.</note> should give 50,000 d&amacr;ms to faqirs. I sent a jewelled sword to the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n, and promoted Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n Anj&umacr; to the rank of 3,000. The office of <hi>&Sdotb;adr</hi> was entrusted to M&imacr;r&amacr;n &Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n, and I ordered &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr; Koka, who was one of my father&apos;s foster-sisters,<note n=2>&Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr; Koka was sister of Sa&ayin;&amacr;dat Y&amacr;r Koka (Akbar-n&amacr;ma, iii, 656). According to Price this passage refers to a widows&apos; fund.</note> to bring before me in the palace such women as were worthy to be presented with land and money. I promoted Z&amacr;hid &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Mu&hdotb;ammad &Sdotb;&amacr;diq &Khbarb;&amacr;n, from the rank of 1,500 to that of 2,000.

<p>It had been the custom<note n=3>This was one of Akbar&apos;s regulations (Blochmann p. 142). The amount was ten dams on each muhr of the horse&apos;s value, calculated on an increase of 50 per cent. See also Price, p. 61.</note> that when the gift of an elephant or horse was made to anyone, the naqibs and the Masters of the Horse (<hi>M&imacr;r &Amacr;&khbarb;&umacr;r&amacr;n</hi>) took from him a sum of money as <hi>jilaw&amacr;na</hi> (bridle-money). I gave orders that this money should be paid by the government, so that people might be freed from the importunities and demands of that set of men.

<p>At this time S&amacr;lb&amacr;han arrived from Burhanpur and produced before me the horses and elephants of my deceased brother D&amacr;niy&amacr;l. Of the elephants, one male named Mast <pb id=pb47 n=47>Alast appeared to me the best, and I gave him the name of N&umacr;r Gaj. A wonderful thing showed itself in this elephant; on the sides of his ears small lumps had grown about the size of melons, and from them came fluid such as drops from an elephant in the rutting season; moreover, the top of his forehead was more prominent than in other elephants. It was a splendid and imposing animal.<note n=1>This passage is not clear, but the peculiarity to which attention is drawn seems rather the prominent forehead than the oozing fluid. Price (p. 62) has a fuller account of this elephant.</note>

<p>I gave to my son &Khbarb;urram (&Shbarb;&amacr;h-Jah&amacr;n) a rosary of jewels, with the hope that he might obtain fulfilment of all his desires, both in visible and in spiritual things.

<p>As I had remitted in my dominions customs duties amounting to krors, I abolished also all the transit dues (<hi>s&amacr;&hamza;ir-jih&amacr;t</hi>) in Kabul, which is one of the noted towns on the road to Hindustan. These brought in 1 kror and 23 lakhs of dams. From the provinces of Kabul and Qandahar large sums used to be derived every year from customs (<hi>zak&amacr;&hamza;t</hi>), which were in fact the chief revenue of those places. I remitted these ancient dues, a proceeding that greatly benefited the people of Iran and Turan.

<p>&Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s jagir in the subah of Bih&amacr;r had been given to B&amacr;z Bah&amacr;dur; I therefore ordered that a jagir in the Panjab should be given to him. As it was represented to me that a large sum was in arrears in his jagir, and now that the order for exchange had been given its collection would be difficult, I directed that a lakh of rupees should be given to him from the Treasury and the arrears recovered from B&amacr;z Bah&amacr;dur for the royal revenues.

<p>I promoted &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f &Amacr;mul&imacr; to the rank of 2,500, original and increase. He is a pure-hearted, lively-spirited man. Though he has no tincture of current sciences, lofty words and exalted knowledge often manifest themselves in him. In the dress of a faqir he made many journeys, and he <pb id=pb48 n=48>has friendship with many saints and recites the maxims of those who profess mysticism. This is his conversation, not his practice (<hi>q&amacr;li-&umacr; ast na &hdotb;&amacr;l&imacr;</hi>). In the time of my revered father he relinquished the garments of poverty and asceticism, and attained to amirship and chiefship. His utterance is exceedingly powerful, and his conversation is remarkably eloquent and pure, although he is without Arabic. His compositions also are not devoid of verve.<note n=1>See Blochmann, pp. 176, 452, and the very full account of him in the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, iii, 285. Amul is an old city south of the Caspian and west of Astrabad.</note>

<p>A garden in Agra had been left by &Shbarb;&amacr;h Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;ram, and as he had no heirs I handed it over to Ruqayya Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Begam, the daughter of Hind&amacr;l M&imacr;rz&amacr;, who had been the honoured wife of my father.<note n=2>She was Akbar&apos;s first and principal wife, but bore him no children. She long survived him.</note> My father had given my son &Khbarb;urram into her charge, and she loved him a thousand times more than if he had been her own.


<div2 type=Section>
<head>The Great Feast of Naur&umacr;z.</head>

<p>On the night of Tuesday, &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da 11th, <hi rend=sc>A.H.</hi> 1014 (March 11th or 12th, 1606), in the morning, which is the time of the blessing of light, his Eminence the Great Luminary passed from the constellation of the Fish to the House of Honour in the constellation of the Ram. As this was the first New Year&apos;s Day after my auspicious accession I ordered them to decorate the porticoes of the private and public halls of the palace, as in the time of my revered father, with delicate stuffs, and to adorn them handsomely. From the first day of the Naur&umacr;z to the 19th degree of the Ram (Aries), which is the day of culmination, the people gave themselves over to enjoyment and happiness. Players and singers of all bands and castes were gathered together. Dancing lulis and charmers of India whose caresses would <pb id=pb49 n=49>captivate the hearts of angels kept up the excitement of the assemblies. I gave orders that whoever might wish for intoxicating drinks and exhilarating drugs should not be debarred from using them.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Cupbearer! brighten my cup with the light of wine;
    <l>Sing, minstrel, for the world has ordered itself as I desire.&rdquo;<note n=1>These are the opening lines of an ode of &Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb;.</note>
</lg>


<p>In my father&apos;s time it had become established that one of the great nobles should prepare an entertainment on each of the 17 or 18 days of the festival, and should present His Majesty the king with choice gifts of all kinds of jewels and jewelled things, precious stuffs, and elephants and horses, and should invite him to take the trouble to come to his assembly. By way of exalting his servants, he would deign to be present, and having looked at the presents would take what he approved of and bestow the remainder on the giver of the entertainment. As my mind was inclined to the comfort and ease of the army and subjects, I this year let them off their gifts with the exception of a few from my immediate retainers, which I accepted in order to gratify them. In those same days many servants of the State obtained higher rank. Amongst them I raised Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n Af&ghbarb;&amacr;n to 1,500, and I raised R&amacr;ja B&amacr;so, who was a landholder of the hill country of the Panjab, and who from the time I was prince till now has kept the way of service and sincerity towards me and held the rank of 1,500, to 3,500. &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor of Qandahar, I promoted to 5,000, and R&amacr;y R&amacr;y Singh, a R&amacr;jp&umacr;t noble, obtained the same rank. I gave 12,000 rupees for expenses to R&amacr;n&amacr; &Shbarb;ankar.

<p>At the beginning of my reign, a son of that Mu&zumlb;affar Gujar&amacr;t&imacr; who claimed to be descended from the rulers of that country lifted up the head of disturbance and attacked and plundered the environs of the city of Ahmadabad. <pb id=pb50 n=50>Some sardars such as P&imacr;m<note n=1>Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;. <hi>Yat&imacr;m</hi> instead of P&imacr;m or B&imacr;m. See Blochmann, p. 470. Erskine has Sa&imacr;n Bah&amacr;dur.</note> Bah&amacr;dur &Umacr;zbeg and R&amacr;y &ayin;Al&imacr; Bhat&imacr;, who were amongst the distinguished and brave men there, became martyrs in that outbreak. At length R&amacr;ja Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t and many mansabdars were provided by me with 6,000 or 7,000 horse, and appointed to assist the army of Gujarat. It was decided that when things had quieted down, by the driving off of those seditious people, R&amacr;ja Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t should be Subahdar of Gujarat. Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been previously nominated to this office, should come to Court. After the arrival of the royal troops the thread of the rebels&apos; union was severed; they took refuge in different jungles, and the country was reduced to order. The news of this victory reached the ear of my state and dignity in the most acceptable of hours (New Year time).

<p>About this time there came a representation from my son Parw&imacr;z that the R&amacr;n&amacr; had left <hi>th&amacr;na</hi> Mandal, which is about 30<note n=2>MS. 181 has 34.</note> or 40 <hi>kos</hi> from Ajm&imacr;r, and had run away, and that a force had been appointed to pursue him; and that it was to be hoped the good fortune of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r would cause him to become non-existent.

<p>On the last day of the feast of the New Year, many servants of the State were honoured with favours and increase of rank. P&imacr;&shbarb;rau &Khbarb;&amacr;n was an old retainer and had come from Persia (<hi>wil&amacr;yat</hi>) with Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n; indeed, he was one of the men whom &Shbarb;&amacr;h Tahm&amacr;sp had sent with Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n. His name was Mihtar Sa&ayin;&amacr;dat. As under my father he was superintendent (<hi>d&amacr;ro&ghbarb;a</hi>) and head (<hi>mihtar</hi>) of the <hi>farr&amacr;&shbarb;-&khbarb;&amacr;na</hi> (store department), and had no equal in this service, he had given him the title of P&imacr;&shbarb;rau &Khbarb;&amacr;n (the active &Khbarb;&amacr;n). Though he was a subordinate(?) servant and had an artificer&apos;s disposition (<hi>qalaqch&imacr; ma&shbarb;rab</hi>), <pb id=pb51 n=51>I looked to his claims of service and gave him the rank of 2,000.<note n=1>I think Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r means that though the &Khbarb;&amacr;n was an excellent servant in his own line, he was hardly fit for the command of 2,000 or for the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n. Cf. his praise of him at p. 71 (Blochmann, p. 498). He was called P&imacr;&shbarb;rau probably from his going on ahead with the advance camp, as being in charge of the carpets, etc., as well as because of his personal activity.</note>




<div2>
<head>The Flight of &Khbarb;usrau in the Middle of the First Year of my Reign.</head>


<p>Futile<note n=2>In Price&apos;s Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, p. 15, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r states that he had imprisoned &Khbarb;usrau in the upper part of the royal tower in the castle of Agra. It from this confinement that &Khbarb;usrau escaped.</note> ideas had entered the mind of &Khbarb;usrau in consequence of his youth and the pride youths have, and the lack of experience and the lack of foresight of worthless companions, especially at the time of my revered father&apos;s illness. Some of these short-sighted ones, through the multitude of their crimes and offences, had become hopeless of pardon and indulgence, and imagined that by making &Khbarb;usrau a tool they might conduct the affairs of State through him. They overlooked the truth that acts of sovereignty and world rule are not things to be arranged by the worthless endeavours of defective intellects. The just Creator bestows them on him whom he considers fit for this glorious and exalted duty, and on such a person doth He fit the robe of honour.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;He who is seized of Fortune cannot be deprived of it;
    <l>Throne and diadem are not things of purchase;
    <l>It is not right to wrest crown and dominion
    <l>From the head which God, the Crown-cherisher, has indicated.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>As the futile imaginations of the seditious and short-sighted had no result but disgrace and regret, the affairs of the kingdom were confirmed in the hands of this suppliant <pb id=pb52 n=52>at the throne of Allah. I invariably found &Khbarb;usrau preoccupied and distracted. However much, in favour and affection for him, I wished to drive from his mind some of his fears and alarms, nothing was gained until, at last, by the advice of those whose fortune was reversed, on the night of Sunday, &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja 8th, of the year mentioned (April 6th, 1605), when two gharis had passed, he made a pretence<note n=1>Du Jarric says it was in this way that he was allowed to pass the sentinels. Du Jarric gives the date of &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s flight as 15th April, 1606 (this would be New Style). By Sunday night is meant Saturday evening. Sunday was Akbar&apos;s birthday.</note> of going to visit the tomb of His Majesty (Akbar), and went off with 350 horsemen, who were his adherents, from within the fort of Agra. Shortly after, one of the lamp attendants who was acquainted with the Waz&imacr;ru-l-mulk gave him the news of &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s flight. The Vizier took him to the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr;, who, as the news seemed true, came in a distracted state of mind to the door of the private apartments and said to one of the eunuchs, &ldquo;Take in my request and say that I have a necessary representation to make, and let the king honour me by coming out.&rdquo; As such an affair had not entered my thoughts I supposed that news had come from the Deccan or Gujarat. When I came out and heard what the news was, I asked, &ldquo;What must be done? Shall I mount myself, or shall I send &Khbarb;urram?&rdquo; The Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; submitted that he would go if I ordered it. &ldquo;Let it be so,&rdquo; I said. Afterwards he said, &ldquo;If he will not turn back on my advice, and takes up arms, what must be done?&rdquo; Then I said, &ldquo;If he will go in no way on the right road, do not consider a crime anything that results from your action. Kingship regards neither son nor son-in-law. No one is a relation to a king.&rdquo;

<p>When I had said these words and other things, and had dismissed him, it occurred to me that &Khbarb;usrau was very much annoyed with him, and that in consequence of the <pb id=pb53 n=53>dignity and nearness (to me) which he (the Am&imacr;r) enjoyed, he was an object of envy to his equals and contemporaries.<note n=1>Elliot (vii, 292) makes the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; envious of his peers, and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r apprehensive lest he should destroy &Khbarb;usrau, but he had just told him that nothing he did against &Khbarb;usrau would be wrong. Clearly Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s fear was that his favourite should be destroyed by &Khbarb;usrau, or perhaps by the Am&imacr;r&apos;s treacherous associates.</note> Perhaps they might devise treachery and destroy him. I therefore ordered Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk to recall him, and selecting in his place &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Far&imacr;d Ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;-beg&imacr; commanded him to start off at once, and to take with him the mansabdars and ahadis who were on guard. Ihtim&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n the <hi>kotw&amacr;l</hi> was made scout and intelligence officer. I determined, God willing, to start off myself when it was day. Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk brought back the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr;.

<p>About this time, A&hdotb;mad Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n and D&umacr;st Mu&hdotb;ammad &Khbarb;&amacr;n had been sent off to Kabul,<note n=2>The text has a curious mistake here: instead of <hi>ba K&amacr;bul</hi> it has <hi>bak&amacr;wal</hi> (&lsquo;superintendent of the kitchen&rsquo;) as part of D&umacr;st Mu&hdotb;ammad&apos;s name. D&umacr;st was not <hi>bak&amacr;wal</hi>, but held higher office, and was later put in charge of the fort of Agra and given the title of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n.</note> and had got as far as Sikandra, which was on &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s route. On his arrival they came out of their tents with some of their people, and returned and waited on me with the news that &Khbarb;usrau had taken the Panjab road and was hastening on. It occurred to me that he might change his route and go somewhere else. As his maternal uncle, M&amacr;n Singh, was in Bengal, it occurred to many of the servants of the State that he might go in that direction. I sent out on every side, and ascertained that he was making for the Panjab. Meantime day dawned, and in reliance on the grace and favour of God Almighty, and with clear resolve, I mounted, withheld by nothing and no one.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;In truth, he who is pursued by sorrow.
    <l>Knows not how the road is or how he may travel it.
    <l>This he knows, that horror drives him on:
    <l>He knows not with whom he goes nor whom he leaves behind.&rdquo;
</lg>


<pb id=pb54 n=54><p>When I reached the venerable mausoleum of my revered father, which is three kos from the city, I begged for aid to my courage from the spirit of that honoured one. About this time they captured and brought in<note n=1>Price, p. 6, note.</note> M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Hdotb;asan, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, who had proposed to accompany &Khbarb;usrau. He could not deny it when I questioned him, and I ordered them to tie his hands and mount him on an elephant.<note n=2>According to &Khbarb;&amacr;f&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n (i, 250) he was put to death, unless the expression &ldquo;claws of death&rdquo; is merely rhetorical. The Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir (iii, 334) says he was imprisoned.</note> This was the first good omen manifested through the kindness and blessing of that venerable one. At midday, as it had become exceedingly hot, having rested awhile under the shade of a tree, I said to the &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am that we, with all our composure, were in such a state that we had not taken till now our regular allowance of opium, which it was the practice to take the first thing in the morning, and no one had reminded us of the omission. We might imagine from this what was now the condition of that graceless one (&Khbarb;usrau).<note n=3>The above obscure passage is explained in Price, p. 69.</note>

<p>My trouble was this, that my son without any cause or reason should become an opponent and an enemy. If I should make no endeavour to capture him, the fractious or rebellious would have an instrument, or else he would take his own way and go for an asylum to the &Umacr;zbegs or the Persians, and contempt would fall upon my government. On this account, having made a special point of capturing him, I went on after a short rest two or three kos beyond pargana Mathura, which is 20 kos from Agra, and I alighted at one of the villages of that pargana where there is a tank.

<p>When &Khbarb;usrau arrived at Mathura, he met &Hdotb;usain Beg Bada&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;, who was of those who had received favours from my revered father and was coming from <pb id=pb55 n=55>Kabul to wait on me. As it is the temperament of the Bada&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;s to be seditious and turbulent, &Khbarb;usrau regarded<note n=1>Elliot (vi, 293) observes that this is a very involved and obscure passage.</note> this meeting as a godsend, and made &Hdotb;usain Beg the captain and guide of 200 or 300 Badakhshan Aim&amacr;qs, who were with him.

<p>Anyone whom they met, they plundered of horses and goods. Merchants and conveyers of goods were plundered by these rascals, and wheresoever they went men&apos;s wives and children were not safe from the calamity of these wretches. With his own eyes &Khbarb;usrau was witnessing the oppression practised in the hereditary dominions of his ancestors, and after being a witness of the improper deeds of these rascals he a thousand times every moment wished death for himself. Finally, he had no remedy but to temporize with and support those dogs. If good luck and fortune had assisted him in his affairs, he would have made repentance and regret his voucher, and come without any deceit to wait on me. God, who knows the world of secrets, knows that I should have passed over his offences entirely and shown him such favour and affection that to the extent of a hair&apos;s point no estrangement or fear would have remained upon his mind. Inasmuch as during the lifetime of the late king (Akbar) an intention of joining in the sedition of some of the rebels had manifested itself in his mind, and he knew that this had come to my knowledge, he placed no reliance on my kindness and affection. His mother, while I was prince, in grief at his ways and behaviour and the misconduct of her brother M&amacr;dho Singh,<note n=2>Blochmann, p. 418.</note> killed herself by swallowing opium (<hi>tiry&amacr;q</hi>).<note n=3>The word <hi>tiry&amacr;q</hi> means both opium and antidote.</note> What shall I write of her excellences and goodness? She had perfect intelligence, and her devotion to me was such that she would have <pb id=pb56 n=56>sacrificed a thousand sons and brothers for one hair of mine. She constantly wrote to &Khbarb;usrau and urged him to be sincere and affectionate to me. When she saw that it was of no use and that it was unknown how far he would be led away, she from the indignation and high spirit which are inherent in the Rajput character determined upon death. Her mind was several times disturbed, for such feelings were hereditary, and her ancestors and her brothers had occasionally showed signs of madness, but after a time had recovered. At a time when I had gone hunting, on &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja 26th, 1013<note n=1>Blochmann, relying on &Khbarb;&amacr;fi &Khbarb;&amacr;n, puts her death in 1011, and the Akbar-n&amacr;ma (iii, 826) puts it in 1012. The chronogram in the &Khbarb;usrau B&amacr;&ghbarb; yields 1012. See J.R.A.S. for July, 1907, p. 604.</note> (May 6th, 1605), she in her agitation swallowed a quantity of opium, and quickly passed away. It was as if she had foreseen this behaviour of her unworthy son.

<p>My first marriage and that at the commencement of my adolescence was with her. After &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s birth I gave her the title of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Begam. When she could not endure the bad conduct of her son and brother towards me she became disgusted with life and died, thereby escaping the present grief and sorrow. In consequence of her death, from the attachment I had for her, I passed some days without any kind of pleasure in life or existence, and for four days, which amount to 32 watches, I took nothing in the shape of food or drink. When this tale was told to my revered father, a letter of condolence of excessive kindness and affection reached this devoted disciple, and he sent me a robe of honour and the auspicious turban tied just as he had taken it off his head. This favour threw water on the flame of my grief and afforded complete quiet and repose to my unquietude and disturbance. My intention in relating these circumstances is to point out that no evil fortune is greater than when a son, through the impropriety <pb id=pb57 n=57>of his conduct and his unapproved methods of behaviour, causes the death of his mother and becomes contumacious and rebellious to his father, without cause or reason, but simply through his own imaginations and futile ideas, and chooses to avoid the blessing of waiting upon him. Inasmuch as the Almighty Avenger lays a proper punishment on each action, of necessity his condition finally came to this, that he was caught under the worst circumstances, and falling from a position of trust became captive to perpetual incarceration.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;When the man of sense behaves as if drunk,
    <l>He puts his foot in a snare, his head in a noose.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>To sum up, on Tuesday, &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja 10th, I alighted at the station of Ho&ddotb;al.<note n=1>Where Lord Bellomont died in 1656. See Manucci (Irvine), i, 71.</note> &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Far&imacr;d Ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr; and a band of valiant men were chosen to pursue &Khbarb;usrau and became the vanguard of the victorious army. I sent back D&umacr;st Mu&hdotb;ammad, who was in attendance on me, on account of his previous service and his white beard, to take charge of the fort of Agra and of the zan&amacr;na and the treasuries. When leaving Agra, I had placed the city in the charge of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daula and Waz&imacr;ru-l-mulk. I now said to D&umacr;st Mu&hdotb;ammad, &ldquo;As we are going to the Panjab, and that province is in the diwani of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daula, you will despatch him to us, and will imprison and keep watch over the sons<note n=2>Probably this means the grandsons. At p. 329 it is mentioned that the grandsons had been confined in Gwalior up to the 16th year.</note> of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m who are in Agra; as when such proceedings manifest themselves in the son of one&apos;s loins what may one expect from nephews and cousins?&rdquo; After the dispatch of D&umacr;st Mu&hdotb;ammad, Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk became bakhshi.

<p>On Wednesday I alighted at Palwal, and on Thursday at Far&imacr;d&amacr;b&amacr;d; on Friday, the 13th, I reached Delhi. <pb id=pb58 n=58>From the dust of the road (i.e. immediately) I hastened to the venerated tomb of Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n, and there besought help in my purpose, and with my own hand distributed money to poor persons and dervishes. Thence turning to the shrine of the venerable saint &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n Auliy&amacr;, I performed the dues of pilgrimage. After this I gave a portion<note n=1><hi>P&amacr;ra</hi>, qu. &lsquo;a heap&rsquo;?</note> of money to Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain Anj&umacr; and another portion to &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Mu&zumlb;affar that they might divide it amongst the poor and dervishes. On Saturday the 14th I stayed in Sar&amacr;y Narela.<note n=2>Narela is said to be 15&frac12; miles north-west of Delhi. William Finch, in his itinerary, mentions the stage as Nalera, a name that corresponds with Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s.</note> This rest-house (<hi>sar&amacr;y</hi>) &Khbarb;usrau had burned as he went.

<p>The rank of &Amacr;q&amacr; Mull&amacr;, brother of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been exalted by becoming my servant, was fixed in original and increase at 1,000 with 300 horse. He was in close attendance during this journey. Considering that some of the Aim&amacr;qs attached to the royal army were in league with &Khbarb;usrau, and fearing that consequently some fraud or sedition might enter their minds, 2,000 rupees were given to their leaders to distribute amongst their men and make them hopeful of the Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; favour. I gave money to &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Fa&zdotb;lu-llah and R&amacr;ja Dh&imacr;rdhar to distribute to faqirs and brahmans on the road. I gave orders that to R&amacr;n&amacr; &Shbarb;ankar in Ajmir should be given 30,000 rupees by way of assistance for his expenditure.

<p>On Monday, the 16th, I reached the pargana of P&amacr;n&imacr;pat.<note n=3>53 miles north of Delhi.</note> This station and place used to be very propitious to my gracious father and honoured ancestors, and two great victories had been gained in it. One was the defeat of Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m Lod&imacr;, which was won by the might of the victorious hosts of His Majesty Fird&umacr;s-mak&amacr;n&imacr;. The story of this has been written in the histories of the time. <pb id=pb59 n=59>The second victory was over the wicked Hem&umacr;, and was manifested from the world of fortune in the beginning of the reign of my revered father, as has been described by me in detail.

<p>At the time that &Khbarb;usrau had left Delhi and was proceeding to Panipat, it happened that Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n had arrived there. When shortly before &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s arrival he heard of this affair, he sent his children across the Jumna and bravely determined to hasten on and throw himself into the fort of Lahore before &Khbarb;usrau should arrive. About this time &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m also reached Panipat from Lahore, and Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n suggested to him that he too should send his children across the river, and should stand aside and await the victorious standards of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r. As he was lethargic and timid, he could not make up his mind to do this, and delayed so much that &Khbarb;usrau arrived. He went out and waited on him, and either voluntarily or in a state of agitation agreed to accompany him. He obtained the title of Malik Anwar and the position of vizier. Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, like a brave man, turned towards Lahore, and on his road informed everyone and everybody of the servants of the court and the <hi>karoriy&amacr;n</hi>, and the merchants whom he came across, of the exodus of &Khbarb;usrau. Some he took with him, and others he told to stand aside out of the way. After that, the servants of God were relieved of the plundering by robbers and oppressors. Most probably, if Sayyid Kam&amacr;l in Delhi, and Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n at Panipat, had shown courage and determination, and had blocked &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s path, his disorderly force would not have been able to resist and would have scattered, and he himself would have been captured. The fact is that their talents (<hi>himmat</hi>) were not equal to this, but afterwards each made amends for his fault, viz., Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, by his rapid march, entered the fort of Lahore before &Khbarb;usrau reached it, and by this notable service made amends for his earlier shortcoming, <pb id=pb60 n=60>and Sayyid Kam&amacr;l manfully exerted himself in the engagement with &Khbarb;usrau, as will be described in its own place.

<p>On &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja 17th the royal standards were set up in the pargana of Karn&amacr;l. Here I raised &ayin;&Amacr;bid&imacr;n &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, son of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Kal&amacr;n J&umacr;yb&amacr;r&imacr; and <hi>p&imacr;rz&amacr;da</hi> (spiritual adviser), son of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n &Umacr;zbeg, who had come in the time of my revered father, to the rank of 1,000. &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ni&zumlb;&amacr;m Thaneswar&imacr;, who was one of the notorious impostors (<hi>&shbarb;ayy&amacr;d&amacr;n</hi>) of the age, waited on &Khbarb;usrau, and having gratified him with pleasant news, again<note n=1>Instead of <hi>t&amacr;za</hi> the MSS. have <hi>p&amacr;ra</hi>, and the meaning seems to be that he accompanied &Khbarb;usrau for some distance. In Price&apos;s Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r (p. 81) it is said that Ni&zumlb;&amacr;m received 6,000 rupees.</note> led him out of the (right) path, and then came to wait on me. As I had heard of these transactions, I gave him his road expenses and told him to depart for the auspicious place of pilgrimage (Mecca). On the 19th the halt was in pargana &Shbarb;&amacr;h&amacr;b&amacr;d. Here there was very little water, but it happened that heavy rain fell, so that all were rejoiced.

<p>I promoted &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; A&hdotb;mad L&amacr;hor&imacr;, who from my princehood had filled the relationship of service and discipleship and the position of a house-born one (<hi>&khbarb;&amacr;naz&amacr;da</hi>) to the office of M&imacr;r-i-&ayin;Adl (Chief Justice). Disciples<note n=2>This is an interesting passage, because it is Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s account of his father&apos;s &lsquo;Divine Faith.&rsquo; But it is obscure, and copyists seem to have made mistakes. It is explained somewhat by the MS. used by Price (trans., pp. 82, 83), where more details are given than in the text. It is there stated that A&hdotb;mad was M&imacr;r-i-&ayin;Adl of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r before the latter&apos;s accession.</note> and sincere followers were presented on his introduction, and to each it was necessary to give the token<note n=3>The text has <hi>dast u s&imacr;na</hi> (hand and bosom), but the correct words, as is shown in the I.O. MS., No. 181, are <hi>&shbarb;ast u &shbarb;abiha</hi> or <hi>&shbarb;abah</hi>, and these refer to the ring or token and the portrait given by Akbar to the followers of the &lsquo;Divine Faith.&rsquo; See Blochmann, pp. 166 n. and 203; and Baday&umacr;n&imacr;, ii, 338. A&hdotb;mad appears to be the A&hdotb;mad <hi>S&umacr;f&imacr;</hi> of Blochmann, pp. 208, 209, and of Baday&umacr;n&imacr;, ii, 404, and Lowe, p. 418. He was a member of the &lsquo;Divine Faith.&rsquo;</note> and the likeness (<hi>&shbarb;ast <pb id=pb61 n=61>u &shbarb;abah</hi>). They were given on his recommendation (?). At the time of initiation some words of advice were given to the disciple: he must not confuse or darken his years with sectarian quarrels, but must follow the rule of universal peace with regard to religions; he must not kill any living creature with his own hand, and must not flay anything. The only exceptions are in battle and the chase.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Be not the practiser of making lifeless any living thing.
    <l>Save in the battlefield or in the time of hunting.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>Honour the luminaries (the Sun, Moon, etc.), which are manifesters of God&apos;s light, according to the degree of each, and recognize the power and existence of Almighty God at all times and seasons. Be careful indeed that whether in private or in public you never for a moment forget Him.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Lame or low<note n=1>Text, <hi>p&umacr;j</hi> or <hi>p&umacr;ch</hi>, but the manuscript reading <hi>l&umacr;k</hi> is preferable. Erskine&apos;s MS. has <hi>l&umacr;j</hi>, naked.</note> or crooked or unrefined,
    <l>Be amorous of Him and seek after Him.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>My revered father became possessed of these principles, and was rarely void of such thoughts.

<p>At the stage of Al&umacr;wa(?)<note n=2>Price (p. 83) has Anand or Anwand. Apparently Al&umacr;wa is right; it is a place 18 miles north-west of Umballa. Cf. &ldquo;India under Aurangzib,&rdquo; by J. N. Sarkar.</note> I appointed Ab&umacr;-n-nab&imacr;(?)<note n=3>Ab&umacr;-l-Bey, the Ab&umacr;-l-Baq&amacr; of Akbar-n&amacr;ma, iii, 820.</note> &Umacr;zbeg with fifty-seven other mansabdars to assist &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Far&imacr;d, and gave the force 40,000 rupees for its expenses. To Jam&imacr;l Beg were given 7,000 rupees to divide among the Aim&amacr;qs (cavalry). I also presented M&imacr;r &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f &Amacr;mul&imacr;<note n=4>A member of the &lsquo;Divine Faith&rsquo; (Blochmann, p. 452, etc.).</note> with 2,000 rupees.

<p>On Tuesday the 24th of the same month they captured five of the attendants and comrades of &Khbarb;usrau. Two of <pb id=pb62 n=62>these, who confessed to his service, I ordered to be thrown under the feet of elephants, and three who denied were placed in custody that enquiry might be made. On Farward&imacr;n 12th of the first year of my reign, M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Hdotb;usain and N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Qul&imacr; the <hi>kotw&amacr;l</hi> entered Lahore, and on the 24th of the same month a messenger of Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n arrived (there) with news that &Khbarb;usrau was moving on Lahore and that they should be on their guard. On the same day the city gates were guarded and strengthened, and two days later Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n entered the fort with a few men and began to strengthen the towers and walls. Wherever these were broken and thrown down he repaired them, and, placing cannon and swivel guns on the citadel, he prepared for battle. Assembling the small number of the royal servants who were in the fort, they were assigned their several duties, and the people of the city also with loyalty gave their assistance. Two days later, and when all was ready, &Khbarb;usrau arrived, and, having fixed a place for his camp, gave orders to invest<note n=1>The text has <hi>qatl</hi> by mistake for <hi>qabl</hi>.</note> the city and to prepare for battle, and to burn one of the gates on any side where one could be got at. &ldquo;After taking the fort,&rdquo; he said to his wicked crew, &ldquo;I will give orders to plunder the city for seven days and to make captive the women and children.&rdquo;

<p>This doomed lot set fire to a gate, and Dil&amacr;war Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, &Hdotb;usain Beg the d&imacr;w&amacr;n, and N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Qul&imacr; the kotwal built a wall inside opposite the gateway.

<p>Meantime Sa&ayin;&imacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was one of those appointed to Kashmir and was now encamped on the Chen&amacr;b, having heard the news, started rapidly for Lahore. When he reached the Ravi he sent word to the garrison of the fort that he came with a loyal intention and that they should admit him. They sent someone at night and conducted him and some of his men inside. When the siege had <pb id=pb63 n=63>lasted nine days, news of the approach of the royal army came repeatedly to &Khbarb;usrau and his adherents. They became helpless (<hi>b&imacr; p&amacr;</hi>), and made up their minds that they must face the victorious army.

<p>As Lahore is one of the greatest places in Hindustan, a great number of people gathered in six or seven days. It was reported on good authority that 10,000 or 12,000 horse were collected, and had left the city with the view of making a night attack on the royal vanguard. This news was brought to me at the <hi>sar&amacr;y</hi> of Q&amacr;&zdotb;&imacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; on the night of Thursday the 16th. Although it rained heavily in the night I beat the drum of march and mounted. Arriving in Sul&tumlb;&amacr;np&umacr;r at dawn I remained there till noon. By chance, at this place and hour the victorious army encountered that ill-fated band. Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk had brought a dish of roast meat,<note n=1><hi>Biry&amacr;n&imacr;.</hi> See Blochmann, p. 60.</note> and I was turning towards it with zest when the news of the battle was brought to me. Though I had a longing to eat the roast meat, I immediately took a mouthful by way of augury and mounted, and without waiting for the coming up of men and without regard to the smallness of my force I went off in all haste. However much I demanded my <hi>chiltah</hi> (wadded coat), they did not produce it. My only arms were a spear and sword, but I committed myself to the favour of God and started off without hesitation. At first my escort did not number more than fifty horsemen; no one had expected a fight that day. In fine, when I reached the head of the bridge of Gobindw&amacr;l,<note n=2>The Gundv&amacr;l of Tiefenthaler, i, 113. Cunningham, in his history of the Sikhs, spells it Go&imacr;ndw&amacr;l. It is on the Beas.</note> 400 or 500 horse, good and bad, had come together. When I had crossed the bridge the news of a victory was brought to me. The bearer of the good news was &Shbarb;ams&imacr;, <hi>t&umacr;&shbarb;akch&imacr;</hi> (wardrobe man), and for his good news he obtained the title of <pb id=pb64 n=64>&Khbarb;&umacr;&shbarb;-&khbarb;abar &Khbarb;&amacr;n. M&imacr;r Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain, whom I had sent previously to advise &Khbarb;usrau, came up at the same time and said such things about the number and bravery of &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s men as frightened his hearers. Though news of the victory came continuously, this simple-minded Sayyid would not believe it, and expressed incredulity that such an army as he had seen could be defeated by &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Far&imacr;d&apos;s force, which was small and not properly equipped. When they brought &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s litter<note n=1> The text has <hi>singh&amacr;san</hi> instead of <hi>sukh&amacr;san</hi>. K&amacr;mg&amacr;ar &Hdotb;usain&imacr; has <hi>sukhp&amacr;l</hi>.</note> with two of his eunuchs, the M&imacr;r admitted what had happened. Then, alighting from his horse, he placed his head at my feet and professed every kind of humility and submission, and said that there could be no higher or more lofty fortune than this.

<p>In this command &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Far&imacr;d behaved with sincerity and devotion. The Sayyids of B&amacr;rha, who are of the brave ones of the age, and who have held this place in every fight in which they have been, formed the van. Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Sayyid Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n B&amacr;rha, the head of the tribe, had shown great bravery and had received seventeen wounds. Sayyid Jal&amacr;l, also of the brethren of this band, received an arrow in his temple and died a few days later. At the time when the Sayyids of B&amacr;rha, who were not more than fifty or sixty in number, having received wounds from 1,500 Bada&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr; horsemen, had been cut to pieces, Sayyid Kam&amacr;l, who, with his brothers, had been appointed to support the van, came up on the flank and fought with wondrous bravery and manliness. After that the men of the right wing raised the cry of <hi>P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h sal&amacr;mat</hi> (&ldquo;Long live the King&rdquo;) and charged, and the rebels hearing the words, gave up and scattered abroad to various hiding-places. About 400 Aim&amacr;qs became crushed on the plain of anger and overcome by the <pb id=pb65 n=65>victorious army. &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s box of jewels and precious things which he had always with him, fell into our hands.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Who thought that this boy of few years
    <l>Would behave so badly to his sire?
    <l>At the first taste of the cup he brings up the lees.
    <l>He melts away my glory and his own modesty.
    <l>He sets on fire<note n=1>Instead of the <hi>bas&umacr;z&amacr;n&amacr;d</hi> of the text, the MSS. have <hi>ba&shbarb;&umacr;r&amacr;nad</hi>, he defiles. In the last line they have <hi>j&amacr;y</hi> instead of <hi>ta&khbarb;t</hi>.</note> the throne of &Khbarb;&umacr;r&shbarb;&imacr;d,
    <l>He longs for the place of Jam&shbarb;&imacr;d.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>Short-sighted men in Allahabad had urged me also to rebel against my father. Their words were extremely unacceptable and disapproved by me. I know what sort of endurance a kingdom would have, the foundations of which were laid on hostility to a father, and was not moved by the evil counsels of such worthless men, but acting according to the dictates of reason and knowledge I waited on my father, my guide, my <hi>qibla</hi>,<note n=2>I.e. the place to which to turn in prayer.</note> and my visible God, and as a result of this good purpose it went well with me.

<p>In the evening of the day of &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s flight I gave R&amacr;ja B&amacr;so, who is a trusty zamindar of the hill-country of Lahore, leave to go to that frontier, and, wherever he heard news or trace of &Khbarb;usrau, to make every effort to capture him. I also appointed Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n and M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; Akbar&shbarb;&amacr;h&imacr; to a large force, which was to pursue &Khbarb;usrau in whatever direction he might go. I resolved with myself that if &Khbarb;usrau went to Kabul, I would follow him and not turn back till he was captured. If not delaying in Kabul he should go on to Badakhshan and those regions, I would leave Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n in Kabul and return myself (to India). My reason for not going to Badakhshan was that that wretch would (in that case) certainly ally himself with the &Umacr;zbegs, and the disgrace would attach to this State.

<pb id=pb66 n=66><p>On the day on which the royal troops were ordered to pursue &Khbarb;usrau, 15,000 rupees were given to Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n and 20,000 to the ahadis, and 10,000 more were sent with the army to be given to whom it might be necessary to give it on the way.

<p>On Saturday, the 28th, the victorious camp was pitched at Jaip&amacr;l,<note n=1>Elliot (vi, 299) has Jah&amacr;n, and the word in the MSS. does not look like Jaip&amacr;l.</note> which lies seven kos from Lahore. On the same day &Khbarb;usrau arrived with a few men on the bank of the Chen&amacr;b. The brief account of what had happened is that after his defeat those who had escaped with him from the battle became divided in opinion. The Afghans and Indians, who were mostly his old retainers, wished to double back like foxes into Hindustan, and to become a source of rebellion and trouble there. &Hdotb;usain Beg, whose people and family and treasure were in the direction of Kabul, suggested going to Kabul. In the end, as action was taken according to the wish of &Hdotb;usain Beg, the Hindustanis and the Afghans decided to separate themselves from him. On arriving at the Chen&amacr;b, he proposed to cross at the ferry of &Shbarb;&amacr;hp&umacr;r, which is one of the recognized crossings, but as he could find no boats there he made for the ferry of Sodharah, where his people got one boat without boatmen and another full of firewood and grass.

<p>The ferries over the rivers had been stopped because before &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s defeat orders had been given to all the jagirdars and the superintendents of roads and crossings in the subah of the Panjab that as this kind of dispute had arisen they must all be on the alert. &Hdotb;usain Beg wished to transfer the men from the boat with firewood and grass to the other, so that they might convey &Khbarb;usrau across. At this juncture arrived K&imacr;lan,<note n=2>This word appears to be a mistake; it is not in the MSS.</note> son-in-law of Kam&amacr;l <pb id=pb67 n=67>Chaudhar&imacr; of Sodharah, and saw a body of men about to cross in the night. He cried out to the boatmen that there was an order from the king Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r forbidding unknown men from crossing in the night, and that they must be careful. Owing to the noise and uproar, the people of the neighbourhood gathered together, and Kam&amacr;l&apos;s son-in-law took from the boatmen the pole with which they propel the boat, and which in Hindustani is called <hi>ball&imacr;</hi>, and thus made the boat unmanageable. Although money was offered to the boatmen, not one would ferry them over. News went to Ab&umacr;-l-Q&amacr;sim Namak&imacr;n, who was at Gujarat, near the Chen&amacr;b, that a body of men were wanting to cross the river by night, and he at once came to the ferry in the night with his sons and some horsemen. Things went to such a length that &Hdotb;usain Beg shot arrows at the boatmen,<note n=1>When the boat stuck, the boatmen swam ashore, and it was probably then that &Hdotb;usain shot at them. See Blochmann, p. 414, n. 2.</note> and Kam&amacr;l&apos;s son-in-law also took to shooting arrows from the river-bank. For four kos the boat took its own way down the river, until at the end of the night it grounded, and try as they would they could not get it off. Meantime it became day. Ab&umacr;-l-Q&amacr;sim and &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &Khbarb;i&zdotb;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who by the efforts of Hil&amacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n had assembled on this (? the west) side of the river, fortified its west bank, and the zamindars fortified it on the east.

<p>Before this affair of &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s, I had sent Hil&amacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n as <hi>saz&amacr;wal</hi> to the army appointed for Kashm&imacr;r under Sa&ayin;&imacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and by chance he arrived in the neighbourhood (of the ferry) that same night; he came in the nick of time, and his efforts had great effect in bringing together Ab&umacr;-l-Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n Namak&imacr;n, and &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &Khbarb;i&zdotb;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n in the capture of &Khbarb;usrau.

<p>On the morning of Sunday, the <sic>24th</sic> of the aforesaid month, people on elephants and in boats captured &Khbarb;usrau, and on Monday, the last day of the month, news of this <pb id=pb68 n=68>reached me in the garden of M&imacr;rz&amacr; K&amacr;mr&amacr;n. I immediately ordered the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; to go to Gujarat and to bring &Khbarb;usrau to wait on me.

<p>In counsels on State affairs and government it often happens that I act according to my own judgment and prefer my own counsel to that of others. In the first instance I had elected to wait on my revered father from Allahabad in opposition to the advice of my faithful servants, and I obtained the blessing of serving him, and this was for my spiritual and temporal good. By the same course of conduct I had become king. The second instance was the pursuit of &Khbarb;usrau, from which I was not held back by taking time to ascertain the (auspicious) hour, etc., and from which I took no rest until I captured him. It is a strange thing that after I had started I asked &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &ayin;Al&imacr;, who is learned in mathematics, how the hour of my departure had been (i.e. whether propitious or not), and he replied that in order to obtain my object if I had wished to select an hour, there could not have been for years one selected better than that in which I mounted.

<p>On Thursday, Mu&hdotb;arram 3rd, 1015, in M&imacr;rz&amacr; K&amacr;mr&amacr;n&apos;s garden, they brought &Khbarb;usrau before me with his hands tied and chains on his legs from the left side<note n=1>&ldquo;With a chain fastened from his left hand to his left foot, according to the law of Ching&imacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n&rdquo; (Gladwin&apos;s Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, quoted by Elliot, vi, 507). But apparently what is meant is that &Khbarb;usrau was led up from the left side of the emperor.</note> after the manner and custom of Ching&imacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n. They made &Hdotb;usain Beg stand on his right hand and &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m on his left. &Khbarb;usrau stood weeping and trembling between them. &Hdotb;usain Beg, with the idea that it might profit him, began to speak wildly. When his purport became apparent to me I did not allow him to continue talking, but handed over &Khbarb;usrau in chains, and ordered these two villains to be put in the skins of an ox and an ass, and that they <pb id=pb69 n=69>should be mounted on asses with their faces to the tail<note n=1>Du Jarric, in his history of the Jesuit Missions, gives some details about the punishment. The bullock and ass were slaughtered on the spot and their skins were sewed on the bodies of the unhappy men. Horns and ears were left on the skins.</note> and thus taken round the city. As the ox-hide dried more quickly than that of the ass, &Hdotb;usain Beg remained alive for four watches and died from suffocation. &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m, who was in the ass&apos;s skin and to whom they gave some refreshment from outside, remained alive.

<p>From Monday, the last day of &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja, until the 9th of Mu&hdotb;arram of the aforesaid year, I remained in M&imacr;rz&amacr; K&amacr;mr&amacr;n&apos;s garden because the time was unpropitious.<note n=2>Perhaps the meaning is that the weather was bad.</note> I bestowed Bhairawal,<note n=3>The proper form seems to be Bhaironw&amacr;l, the Bhyrowal of the maps. It is on the right bank of the B&imacr;&amacr;h (Beas) on the road from Jalandhar to Amritsar. See Blochmann, p. 414, note.</note> where the battle had taken place, on &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Far&imacr;d, and rewarded him with the high title of Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n. For the sake of good government I ordered posts to be set up on both sides of the road from the garden to the city, and ordered them to hang up and impale the seditious Aim&amacr;qs and others who had taken part in the rebellion. Thus each one of them received an extraordinary punishment. I gave headship to those landholders who had shown loyalty, and to every one of the Chaudhar&imacr;s between the Jhelam and the Chen&amacr;b I gave lands for their support.

<p>Of &Hdotb;usain Beg&apos;s property there were obtained from the house of M&imacr;r Mu&hdotb;ammad B&amacr;q&imacr; nearly seven lakhs of rupees. This was exclusive of what he had made over to other places and of what he had with him. After this, whenever his name is mentioned, the words<note n=4>The words are omitted in the text. Erskine read in his MS. <hi>g&amacr;u jizwan</hi>, which I do not understand. The I.O. MSS. and B.M. MS. Or 3276 have <hi>g&amacr;w&amacr;n u &khbarb;ar&amacr;n</hi>. &Hdotb;usain Beg, whose proper name was &Hdotb;asan, was a brave soldier, and did good service under Akbar. See his biography in Blochmann, p. 454.</note> <hi>g&amacr;w&amacr;n u &khbarb;ar&amacr;n</hi> <pb id=pb70 n=70>(bullocks and asses) will be used. When he came to this Court in company with M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb; he had one horse. By degrees his affairs flourished so that he became possessed of treasure both visible and buried, and projects of this kind entered his mind.

<p>While &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s affair was still in the will of God, as there was no actual governor between Afghanistan and Agra, which is a source of sedition and mischief, and, fearing that &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s affair might be prolonged, I ordered my son Parw&imacr;z to leave some of the sardars to look after the R&amacr;n&amacr; and to come to Agra with &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n and a body of those nearly connected with him in the service. He was to consider the protection and management of that region his special charge. But by the blessed favour of Allah, &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s affair was settled before Parw&imacr;z arrived in Agra; I accordingly ordered my aforesaid son to come and wait on me.

<p>On Wednesday, Mu&hdotb;arram 8th, I auspiciously entered the fort of Lahore. A number of loyalists represented to me that my return to Agra would be for the good of the State at this time when much was going amiss in Gujarat, in the Deccan, and in Bengal. This counsel did not meet with my approval, for the reports of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor of Qandahar, showed that the officers of the Persian border were meditating an attack on that fortress. They had been moved thereto by the machinations of the residuum of the Mirzas of Qandahar&apos;s army, which was always shaking the chain of contention. The Persian officers had written letters to these malcontents, and there was likelihood of a disturbance. It occurred to me that the death of His Majesty Akbar and the unreasonable outbreak of &Khbarb;usrau might put an edge on their design, and that they might attack Qandahar. What had occurred to my mind became a realized fact. The governor of Far&amacr;h<corr sic=.>,</corr> the Malik of S&imacr;stan, and the jagirdars of that neighbourhood, with the assistance of &Hdotb;usain &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the <pb id=pb71 n=71>governor of Herat, invaded Qandahar. Praise is due to the manliness and courage of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who planted his foot firmly like a man, and strengthened the fort, and seated himself on the top of the third(?) citadel of the aforesaid fort in such a manner that outsiders could see his entertainments. During the siege he girded not his loins, but with bare head and feet arranged parties of pleasure; yet no day passed that he did not send a force from the fort to meet the foe and did not make manly efforts. This went on as long as he was in the fort. The Qizilb&amacr;&shbarb; army had invested on three sides. When news of this reached Lahore it was clearly advisable to remain in that neighbourhood. A large force was immediately appointed under the leadership of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;, who was accompanied by a number of men of rank and servants of the Court, such as Qar&amacr; Beg and Tu&khbarb;ta Beg, who had been promoted with the titles of Qar&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n and Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n. I appointed M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; to a mansab of 5,000 personal, and horsemen, and bestowed drums on him. M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;zi was the son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; J&amacr;n&imacr; Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n, king of Thathah (Sind), and by the efforts of &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n that country had been conquered in the reign of the late king. The country of Thathah was included in his jagir, and he held the rank with personality and horsemen of 5,000. After his death his son M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;zi was raised to his rank and service. Their ancestors were among the amirs of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Hdotb;usain <corr sic="Mirza">M&imacr;rz&amacr;</corr> B&amacr;y-qar&amacr;, the ruler of Khurasan, and they were originally descended from the amirs of T&imacr;m&umacr;r (<hi>&Sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ib-qir&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>). &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &ayin;&Amacr;qil was appointed bakhshi of this army; 43,000 rupees were given to Qar&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n for road expenses, and 15,000 to Naqd&imacr; Beg and Qil&imacr;j Beg, who were to accompany M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;. I determined to stay at Lahore in order to settle this matter and with the intention of a tour to Kabul. About this time the rank of &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Fat&hdotb;u-llah was fixed, original and increased, at 1,000 personality and 300 horse. As &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;usain J&amacr;m&imacr; had <pb id=pb72 n=72>had dreams about me which had come true, I gave him twenty lakhs of dams, equivalent to 30,000 or 40,000 rupees, for the expenses of himself and his monastery and the dervishes who were with him. On the 22nd I promoted &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n to the rank of 2,500 personal and 500 horse, original and increased. I ordered to be given to the ahadis two lakhs of rupees to be paid in advance and deducted by degrees from their monthly pay. I bestowed 6,000 rupees on Q&amacr;sim Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the son-in-law of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and 3,000 rupees on Sayyid Bah&amacr;dur &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>In Gobindw&amacr;l, which is on the river B&imacr;y&amacr;h (Beas), there was a Hindu named Arjun,<note n=1>The fifth G&umacr;r&umacr; of the Sikhs and the compiler of the Granth. He was the father of Har Govind. See Sayyid Muhammad La&tumlb;&imacr;f&apos;s history of the Punj&amacr;b, p. 253. Arjun&apos;s tomb is in Lahore.</note> in the garments of sainthood and sanctity, so much so that he had captured many of the simple-hearted of the Hindus, and even of the ignorant and foolish followers of Islam, by his ways and manners, and they had loudly sounded the drum of his holiness. They called him <hi>G&umacr;r&umacr;</hi>, and from all sides stupid people crowded to worship and manifest complete faith in him. For three or four generations (of spiritual successors) they had kept this shop warm. Many times it occurred to me to put a stop to this vain affair or to bring him into the assembly of the people of Islam.

<p>At last when &Khbarb;usrau passed along this road this insignificant fellow proposed to wait upon him. &Khbarb;usrau happened to halt at the place where he was, and he came out and did homage to him. He behaved to &Khbarb;usrau in certain special ways, and made on his forehead a finger-mark in saffron, which the Indians (Hinduw&amacr;n) call <hi>qa&shbarb;qa</hi>,<note n=2>But <hi>qa&shbarb;qa</hi> is a Turkish word. The Hindi phrase seems to be <hi>&tdotb;&imacr;k&amacr;</hi>.</note> and is considered propitious. When this came to my ears and I clearly understood his folly, I ordered them <pb id=pb73 n=73>to produce him and handed over his houses, dwelling-places, and children to Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and having confiscated his property commanded that he should be put to death.

<p>There were two men named R&amacr;j&umacr; and Amb&amacr;, who, under the shadow of the protection of the eunuch Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, made their livelihood by oppression and tyranny, and had done many acts of oppression in the few days that &Khbarb;usrau was before Lahore. I ordered R&amacr;j&umacr; to the gallows and a fine to be taken from Amb&amacr;, who was reputed to be wealthy. In short, 15,000 rupees were collected from him, which sum I ordered them to expend on <hi>bul&ghbarb;ur-&khbarb;&amacr;nas</hi> (refectories) and in charity.

<p>Sa&ayin;du-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Sa&ayin;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, was promoted to the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse.

<p>In his great desire to wait upon me, Parw&imacr;z traversed long distances in a short time, in the rainy season and incessant rain, and on Thursday, the 29th, when two watches and three <hi>gha&rdotb;&imacr;</hi> of day had passed, obtained the blessing of seeing me. With exceeding kindness and affection, I took him into the embrace of favour and kissed his forehead.

<p>When this disgraceful conduct showed itself in &Khbarb;usrau, I had resolved not to delay in any place till I had captured him. There was a probability that he might turn back towards Hindustan, so it appeared impolitic to leave Agra empty, as it was the centre of the State, the abode of the ladies of the holy harem, and the depository of the world&apos;s treasures. On these accounts I had written when leaving Agra to Parw&imacr;z, saying that his loyalty had had this result, that &Khbarb;usrau had fled and that Fortune had turned her face toward himself; that I had started in pursuit of &Khbarb;usrau, and that he should consequently dispose of the affairs of the R&amacr;n&amacr; in some way according to the necessity of the time, and for the benefit of the kingdom should himself come quickly to <pb id=pb74 n=74>Agra. I had delivered into his charge the capital and treasury, which was equal to the wealth of Q&amacr;r&umacr;n,<note n=1>The cousin of Moses, famous for his wealth; the Korah of the Bible.</note> and I had commended him to the God of power. Before this letter reached Parw&imacr;z, the R&amacr;n&amacr; had been so humbled that he had sent to &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n to say that as by his own acts he had come to shame and disgrace, he hoped that he would intercede for him in such a way that the prince would be content with his sending B&amacr;gha,<note n=2>Gladwin has N&amacr;gh.</note> who was one of his sons. Parw&imacr;z had not agreed to this, and said that either the R&amacr;n&amacr; himself should come or that he should send Karan. Meantime the news of &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s disturbance arrived, and on its account &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n and other loyalists agreed to the coming of B&amacr;gha, who obtained the blessing of waiting on the prince near Man&ddotb;alga&rdotb;h.

<p>Parw&imacr;z, leaving R&amacr;ja Jagann&amacr;th and most of the chiefs of his army, started for Agra with &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n and some of those near to him and his own attendants, and with him brought B&amacr;gha to the Court. When he came near Agra he heard the news of the victory over &Khbarb;usrau and his capture, and after resting two days an order reached him that as matters appeared settled in all quarters he should betake himself to me, in order that on the prescribed date he might obtain the good fortune of waiting on me. I bestowed on him the parasol (<hi>&amacr;ft&amacr;b-g&imacr;r</hi>),<note n=3>Blochmann, p. 50.</note> which is one of the signs of royalty, and I gave him the rank of 10,000 and sent an order to the officials to grant him a <hi>tan&khbarb;w&amacr;h</hi> jagir. At this time I sent M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; Beg to Kashmir; 10,000 rupees were delivered to Q&amacr;&zdotb;&imacr; &ayin;Izzatu-llah to divide amongst faqirs and the poor of Kabul. A&hdotb;mad Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n was promoted to the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,250 horse, original and extra. At the same time Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been sent to Burhanpur to bring the children of D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, returned after an absence of 6 months <pb id=pb75 n=75>22 days and had the honour of an audience, and related in detail what had occurred in those regions.

<p>Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n was promoted to the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse. &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &ayin;Abdu-l-Wahh&amacr;b<note n=1>Akbar-n&amacr;ma, iii, 748, and Blochmann, p. 546. He was a man of piety and learning, and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r means that he restored him to his former quiet life. The <hi>arb&amacr;b-i-sa&ayin;&amacr;dat</hi>, or auspicious persons, were those who offered up prayers for the king&apos;s prosperity and other blessings.</note> of the Bu&khbarb;ara sayyids, who was governor of Delhi under the late king, was dismissed from the post (by me) for certain ill-deeds done by his men, and was entered amongst the holders of subsistence lands and the <hi>arb&amacr;b-i-sa&ayin;&amacr;dat</hi>.

<p>In the whole of the hereditary dominions, both the crown lands and the jagirs, I ordered the preparation of <hi>bul&ghbarb;ur-&khbarb;&amacr;nas</hi> (free eating-houses), where cooked food might be provided for the poor according to their condition, and so that residents and travellers both might reap the benefit.

<p>Amba<note n=2>Amba was killed later by N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n&apos;s husband, <corr sic="Sh&imacr;r Afgan">Sh&imacr;r-Afgan</corr> (T&umacr;zuk, pp. 54, 55).</note> &Khbarb;&amacr;n Kashm&imacr;r&imacr;, who was of the stock of the rulers of Kashmir, was selected for the rank of 1,000 personal and 300 horse. On Monday, Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-&amacr;&khbarb;ir 9th, I gave Parw&imacr;z a special sword; and jewelled swords were presented also to Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka and the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr;. I saw D&amacr;niy&amacr;l&apos;s children, whom Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n had brought; there were three sons and four daughters. The boys bore the names &Tumlb;ahm&umacr;ra&sumlb;,<note n=3>Blochmann, p. 310.</note> B&amacr;ysun&ghbarb;ar, and H&umacr;&shbarb;ang. Such kindness and affection were shown by me to these children as no one thought possible. I resolved that &Tumlb;ahm&umacr;ra&sumlb;, who was the eldest, should always be in waiting on me, and the others were handed over to the charge of my own sisters.

<p>A special dress of honour was sent to R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh in Bengal. I ordered a reward of 30 lakhs of dams to M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;zi. I bestowed on &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m, son of <pb id=pb76 n=76>Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka, the rank of 1,000 personal and 300 horse, and dignified him with the title of Ki&shbarb;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>As when I started in pursuit of &Khbarb;usrau I had left my son &Khbarb;urram in charge of the palaces and treasury, I now, when that affair had been settled, ordered the said son to attend upon Ha&zdotb;rat Maryam-zam&amacr;n&imacr; and the other ladies, and to escort them to me. When they reached the neighbourhood of Lahore, on Friday the 12th of the month mentioned, I embarked in a boat and went to a village named Dahr to meet my mother, and I had the good fortune to be received by her. After the performance of obeisance and prostration and greeting which is due from the young to the old according to the custom of Ching&imacr;z, the rules of T&imacr;m&umacr;r and common usage, and after worship of the King of the World (God), and after finishing this business, I obtained leave to return, and re-entered the fort of Lahore.

<p>On the 17th, having appointed Mu&ayin;izzu-&imacr;-mulk bakhshi of the army against the R&amacr;n&amacr;, I dismissed him to it. As news had come of the rebellion of R&amacr;y R&amacr;y Singh and his son, Dul&imacr;p, in the neighbourhood of N&amacr;gor, I ordered R&amacr;ja Jagann&amacr;th to proceed against them with others of the servants of the State and Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk, and to put a stop to this disturbance. I gave 50,000 rupees to Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been appointed to the place of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n as Governor of Qandahar, and I promoted him to the rank of 3,000 personal and 2,500 horse. To &Khbarb;i&zdotb;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the late ruler of &Khbarb;andesh, were given 3,000 rupees, and to his brother, A&hdotb;mad &Khbarb;&amacr;n,<note n=1>These words are not in the MSS., and they seem to have crept into the text by mistake and to be a premature entry of words relating to H&amacr;&shbarb;im, etc. The brother of the former ruler (or king) of &Khbarb;andesh could hardly be a <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;naz&amacr;d</hi>.</note> who is one of the &khbarb;&amacr;naz&amacr;das of the State. H&amacr;&shbarb;im &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who is one of the house-born of the State, and <pb id=pb77 n=77>worthy of advancement, I promoted to the rank of 2,500 personal and 1,500 horse. I gave him also one of my own horses. I sent robes of honour to eight individuals amongst the nobles of the army of the Deccan.<note n=1>This should be, according to the MSS., &ldquo;army against the R&amacr;n&amacr;,&rdquo; not army of the Deccan.</note> Five thousand rupees were given to Ni&zumlb;&amacr;m of Shiraz, the story-teller. Three thousand rupees were given for the expenses of the <hi>bul&ghbarb;&umacr;r-&khbarb;&amacr;na</hi> of Kashmir to the <hi>wak&imacr;l</hi> of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; Beg, the governor of that place, to send to Srinagar. I presented a jewelled dagger of the value of 6,000 rupees to Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>News reached me that &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m B&amacr;b&amacr;, the Afghan, had opened a religious establishment (lit. one of being a shaikh and having disciples) in one of the parganas<note n=2>The MSS. have &ldquo;in the neighbourhood of Lahore.&rdquo; Parw&imacr;z had then charge of Bihar.</note> of Lahore, and as his doings were disreputable and foolish a considerable number of Afghans had collected round him. I ordered him to be brought and handed over to Parw&imacr;z to be kept in the fort of Chunar; so this vain disturbance was put an end to.

<p>On Sunday, 7th Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-l-awwal, many of the mansabdars and ahadis were promoted: Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n obtained the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,300 horse, Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n 2,000 personal and 1,400 horse, Waz&imacr;ru-l-mulk 1,300 personal and 550 horse, Qayy&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n 1,000 personal and horse, &Shbarb;y&amacr;m Singh 1,500 personal and 1,200 horse; in the same way forty-two mansabdars were promoted. On most days the same observances occur. I presented Parw&imacr;z with a ruby of the value of 25,000 rupees. On Wednesday the 9th of the aforesaid month, the 21st of &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war,<note n=3>Text, wrongly, Bahman. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was born on the 21st of &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war.</note> after three watches and four gharis, the feast for my solar weighing, which is the commencement of the 38th year of my age, took place. According to custom they got ready <pb id=pb78 n=78>the weighing apparatus and the scales in the house of Maryam-zam&amacr;n&imacr; (his mother). At the moment appointed blessings were invoked and I sate in the scales. Each suspending rope was held by an elderly person who offered up prayers. The first time the weight in gold came to three Hindustani maunds and ten seers. After this I was weighed against several metals, perfumes, and essences, up to twelve weighings, the details of which will be given hereafter. Twice a year I weigh myself against gold and silver and other metals, and against all sorts of silks and cloths, and various grains, etc., once at the beginning of the solar year and once at that of the lunar. The weight of the money of the two weighings I hand over to the different treasurers for faqirs and those in want. On the same auspicious day I promoted Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka, who for many years had expected such a day,<note n=1>Apparently, had long looked forward to the happy day when Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r should be weighed as a king.</note> with various favours. First, I gave him the rank of 5,000 personal and horse, and with this a special robe of honour, a jewelled sword, and one of my own horses, with a jewelled saddle, and I gave him leave to go to the subahdarship of the province of Bengal and Orissa, which is a place for 50,000 horse. As a mark of honour he set off accompanied by a large force, and two lakhs of rupees were given him as a sumptuary allowance. My connection with his mother is such that as in my childhood I was under her guardianship and care, I have not so much affection for my own mother as for her. She is to me my gracious mother, and I do not hold him less dear than my own brothers and children. Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n is the foster-brother who is most fit for fosterage. I gave 300,000 rupees to his auxiliaries. On this day I sent 130,000 as a marriage present (<hi>s&amacr;chiq</hi>) for the daughter of Pah&amacr;r&imacr; (his brother Mur&amacr;d), who had been betrothed to Parw&imacr;z.

<pb id=pb79 n=79><p>On the 22nd, B&amacr;z Bah&amacr;dur Qalm&amacr;q, who had long been guilty of evil practices in Bengal, by the guidance of fortune obtained the honour of kissing my threshold. I gave him a jewelled dagger, 8,000 rupees, and promoted him to the rank of 1,000 personal and horse. One lakh of rupees and cash and jewels were bestowed on Parw&imacr;z. Kesho D&amacr;s M&amacr;r&umacr; was promoted to the grade of 1,500 personal and horse. Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan, who had been the diwan and factotum of my brother D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, together with his children,<note n=1>Perhaps the meaning is that he was introduced along with D&amacr;niy&amacr;l&apos;s children.</note> had the honour of an audience, and was raised to the rank of 1,000 personal and 500 horse. On the 1st of the second Jum&amacr;d&amacr; &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d,<note n=2>Blochmann, p. 492.</note> who was one of the &shbarb;ai&khbarb;z&amacr;das of S&imacr;kr&imacr;, well known for brilliance of understanding and knowledge, and the connection of old service,<note n=3>This refers to his parentage.</note> was honoured with the title of Mu&ayin;a&zumlb;&zumlb;am &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and to him I gave the government of Delhi. On the 21st of the same month I presented Parw&imacr;z with a necklace composed of four rubies and one hundred pearls. The rank of &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Mu&zumlb;affar was fixed at 3,000 personal and 1,000 horse, original and extra. I gave 5,000 rupees to Nathu M&amacr;l (?), R&amacr;ja of Manjholi.<note n=4>In the MSS. this name seems to be Bh&imacr;m Mal. Manjholi is written Manjholah in Blochmann, p. 175.</note>

<p>A remarkable occurrence was the discovery of a letter from M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka to &ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the ruler of &Khbarb;andesh. I had had an impression that he had a particular enmity to me on &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s account, who was his son-in-law. From the discovery of this writing it became clear that he had never given up his innate treachery, and had adopted this unbecoming attitude towards my revered father also. In short, this letter which he had written at some time to R&amacr;ja &ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n <pb id=pb80 n=80>was from beginning to end full of abuse and disapprobation, and said things which no enemy even could have written and such as could not be attributed to anyone, and far less to one like His Majesty, <hi>&ayin;Ar&shbarb;-&amacr;&shbarb;y&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>, a king and an appreciative sovereign, who from childhood had educated him and brought him up because of what was due for services rendered by his mother, and raised the standard of reliance on him to such a high degree as no other person possessed. This letter fell into the hands of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan in Burhanpur amongst the property of R&amacr;ja &ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n. He brought and laid it before me. In reading and seeing it the hair on my limbs stood on end. But for the consideration and due recognition of the fact that his mother had given her milk to my father I could have killed him with my own hand. Having procured his attendance I gave the letter into his hand and told him to read it with a loud voice to those present. When he saw the letter I thought his body would have parted from his soul, but with shamelessness and impudence he read it as though he had not written it and was reading it by order. Those present in that paradise-like assembly of the servants of Akbar and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r and heard the letter read, loosened the tongue of reproach and of curses and abuse. I put the question to him, &ldquo;Leaving aside the treacheries which in reliance on your worthless self you contrived against <hi>my</hi> fortune, what was done to you by my father, who raised you and your family from the dust of the road to such wealth and dignity as to make you the envy of your contemporaries, that you should write these things to the enemies of his Empire? Why did you enrol yourself amongst the wicked and disloyal? Truly, what can one make of an original nature and innate disposition? Since your temperament has been nourished by the water of treachery, what else can spring up but such actions? Passing over what you did to myself, I gave you the rank you had held before, thinking that your treachery <pb id=pb81 n=81>was directed against me only. Since it has become known that you behaved in a similar way to your benefactor and visible Deity, I leave you to the thoughts and actions which you formerly had and still have.&rdquo; After these remarks his lips closed, and he was unable to make any reply. What could he have said in the presence of such disgrace? I gave an order to deprive him of his jagir. Although what this ingrate had done was unpardonable, yet in the end, from certain considerations, I passed it over.

<p>On Sunday the 26th of the above-mentioned month was held the marriage feast of Parw&imacr;z and the daughter of Prince Mur&amacr;d. The ceremony was performed in the house of Her Highness Maryam-zam&amacr;n&imacr;. The entertainment was arranged in the house of Parw&imacr;z, and all who were present were exalted with all kinds of honour and civilities. Nine thousand rupees were handed over to &Shbarb;arif &Amacr;mul&imacr; and other nobles, to be given in alms to faqirs and other poor people.

<p>On Sunday the 10th Rajab I left the city to hunt in Girjhak and Nandana,<note n=1>? Nandanpur. These places are in Sindsag&amacr;r, near Mult&amacr;n.</note> and took up my quarters in the garden of R&amacr;m D&amacr;s, where I remained four days.

<p>On Wednesday the 13th the solar weighing of Parw&imacr;z took place. They weighed him twelve times against various metals and other things, and each weighing came to two maunds and eighteen seers. I ordered the whole to be distributed amongst faqirs. At this time the rank of &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n was fixed at 1,500 personal and 700 horse, original and extra.

<p>After the march of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; and his force it occurred to me to send a second contingent after him. Having bestowed on Bah&amacr;dur<note n=2>MS. 181 has Bahar, and it has 600 instead of 800 horse.</note> &Khbarb;&amacr;n Q&umacr;rbeg&imacr; the rank of 1,500 personal and 800 horse, original and extra, I started off <pb id=pb82 n=82>a body of cavalry,<note n=1>Text, <hi>&Umacr;ym&amacr;q p&umacr;r&imacr;</hi> (?). MS. 181 has <hi>b&umacr;r&imacr;</hi>, and 305 seems to have the same. Can it mean &lsquo;red cavalry&rsquo;? As Blochmann has pointed out, 371, n. 2, the word &Umacr;ym&amacr;q does not always mean the tribe, but was used to denote a superior kind of cavalry.</note> which came to about 3,000, with him under the leadership of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg and Mu&hdotb;ammad Am&imacr;n. For the expenses of this force 200,000 rupees were given and 1,000 musketeers were also appointed.

<p>I left &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n to guard &Khbarb;usrau and defend Lahore. The Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; was deprived of the honour of waiting on me, as he had a severe illness and remained in the city. &ayin;Abdu-r-Razz&amacr;q Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r&imacr;, who had been summoned from the R&amacr;n&amacr;&apos;s country, was promoted to be bakhshi at headquarters, and it was ordered that in company with &ayin;Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan he should perform this service permanently. Following my father&apos;s rule, I appoint two men in association in the discharge of the chief offices, not from want of confidence in them, but because, as they are mortal and no man is safe from accidents or illness, if any confusion or obstacle should present itself to one the other is there so that the affairs of the servants of God may not come to ruin.

<p>At this time also news came that at the Dasahr&amacr;, which is one of the fixed feast days of the Hindus, &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n had made an incursion from K&amacr;lp&imacr;, which is his jagir, into the province of Band&imacr;lah, and displaying great valour made prisoner R&amacr;m Chand, son of Madh&umacr;kar, who for a long time had made a centre of disturbance in that difficult country and taken him to K&amacr;lp&imacr;. For this service he was presented with a standard and raised to 3,000 personal and 2,000 horse.

<p>Petitions from the subah of Bihar represented that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n had had a battle with Sangr&amacr;m, one of the chief zamindars of Bihar, who had about 4,000 horse and innumerable foot, on account of certain opposition and <pb id=pb83 n=83>disloyalty on rough land, and that on the field the aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n had exerted himself manfully. In the end Sangr&amacr;m died of a gunshot wound; many of his men fell in the battle, and those saved from the sword took to flight. Since this distinguished affair had been brought about by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, I promoted him to the rank of 4,500 personal and 3,500 horse.

<p>Three months and six days passed by in hunting; 581 animals were captured with the gun, hunting leopards and nets, and a <hi>qamarg&amacr;h</hi>; of these 158 were killed by my own gun. The qamargah was held twice; on one occasion in Girjh&amacr;k, when the ladies were present, 155 animals were killed; and the second time, in Nand&imacr;na, 110.<note n=1>The <hi>qamarg&amacr;h</hi> or ring-hunt produced 265 head of game; the rest were shot at other times; the total of the list should be apparently 576.</note> The details of the animals killed are as follows: mountain sheep, 180; mountain goats, 29; wild asses, 10; Nilgai, 9; antelope, etc., 348.

<p>On Wednesday the 16th Shaww&amacr;l I returned safe from my hunting, and when one watch and six gharis of day had passed I entered Lahore on the day named. During this hunting a strange affair was witnessed. At Chandw&amacr;lah, where a minaret had been erected, I had wounded in the belly a black antelope. When wounded, a sound proceeded from him such as I have never heard from any antelope, except in the rutting season. Old hunters and those with me were astonished, and said they never remembered nor had they heard from their fathers that such a voice issued from an antelope except at rutting time. This has been written down because it is not void of strangeness. I found the flesh of the mountain goat more delicious than that of all wild animals, although its skin is exceedingly ill-odoured, so much so that even when tanned the scent is not destroyed. I ordered one of the largest of the he-goats to be weighed; it was 2 maunds and 24 seers, equal to 21 foreign maunds <pb id=pb84 n=84>(Persian). I ordered a large ram to be weighed, and it came to 2 maunds and 3 seers <hi>Akbar&imacr;</hi>, equal to 17 Persian (<hi>wil&amacr;yat&imacr;</hi>) maunds. The largest and strongest of the wild asses weighed 9 maunds and 16 seers, equal to 76 Persian (wil&amacr;yat&imacr;) maunds. I have frequently heard from hunters and those fond of the chase that at a certain regular time a worm develops in the horns of the mountain ram, and that this worm causes an irritation which induces the ram to fight with his hind, and that if he finds no rival he strikes his head against a tree or a rock to allay the irritation. After enquiry it seems that the same worm appears in the horn of the female sheep, and since the female does not fight the statement is clearly untrue. Though the flesh of the wild ass is lawful food and most men like to eat it, it was in no way suited to my taste.

<p>Inasmuch as before this time the punishment of Dul&imacr;p and of his father, R&amacr;y R&amacr;y Singh, had been ordered, there now came news that Z&amacr;hid &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the son of &Sdotb;&amacr;diq &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m, son of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l, and R&amacr;n&amacr; <corr sic=Sankar>&Shbarb;ankar</corr> and Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk, with another force of mansabdars and followers of the Court, had heard news of Dul&imacr;p in the neighbourhood of N&amacr;gor, which is in the subah of Ajmir, and having moved against him had found him. As he could find no way of escape, of necessity he planted a firm foot and came to blows with the royal army. After a short encounter he was badly beaten and gave over many to slaughter, and himself, taking with him his own effects, fled into the vale of ruin.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;With broken arms and loosened belt,
    <l>No power to fight and no care for head.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>In spite of his old age, I continued Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n in his mansab because of his service under my father, and I ordered that he should get a jagir in the sarkar of K&amacr;lp&imacr;.

<p>In the month &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da the mother of Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka, who had given me her milk and was as <pb id=pb85 n=85>a mother to me or even kinder than my own kind mother, and in whose lap I had been brought up from infancy, was committed to the mercy of God. I placed the feet of her corpse on my shoulders and carried her a part of the way (to her grave). Through extreme grief and sorrow I had no inclination for some days to eat, and I did not change my clothes.




<div1 id=yr2>
<head>Feast of the Second New Year.</head>


<p>On Wednesday the 22nd &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da, 1015 (10th March, 1607), when 3&frac12; gharis of the day had passed, the sun rose to his House of Honour. They decorated the palace after the usual fashion: a great entertainment was prepared, and having seated myself at an auspicious hour on the throne of accession I exalted the nobles and courtiers with kindness and favour. On this same auspicious day it was learned from the reports sent from Qandahar that the army sent under M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; J&amacr;n&imacr;, to succour (which had been appointed to assist) &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, had entered the city of Qandahar on the 12th of Shaww&amacr;l. When the Persians heard of the arrival of the victorious army at the last stage before the aforesaid city,<note n=1>The MSS. have the 6th stage instead of &ldquo;last.<corr>&rdquo;</corr></note> they became surprised and wretched and repentant, and did not draw rein until they had reached the Helmand, fifty or sixty kos distant.

<p>In the second place it became known that the governor of Far&amacr;h and a number of the officers of that neighbourhood had taken it into their heads, after the death of the late king, that in this confusion Qandahar might easily fall into their hands, and without waiting for an order from &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s had collected together and won over the Chief of Sewist&amacr;n (S&imacr;st&amacr;n). Sending someone to <pb id=pb86 n=86>&Hdotb;usain &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor of Herat they asked for support from him. He also sent a force. After that they turned to attack Qandahar. &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor of that place, seeing that battle has two heads, and that if (which God forbid!) he should be defeated he would lose possession of Qandahar, thought that to confine himself in a fort would be better than to fight. He therefore determined to hold the fort, and sent quick messengers to the Court. It happened that at this time the royal standards had started from Agra in pursuit of &Khbarb;usrau, and had arrived at Lahore. Immediately on hearing this news (from &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n), a large force was sent off of amirs and mansabdars under M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;. Before the M&imacr;rz&amacr; reached Qandahar the news had been carried to the &Shbarb;&amacr;h (of Persia) that the governor of Far&amacr;h, with some of the jagirdars of that neighbourhood, had proceeded towards the province of Qandahar. Considering this an improper proceeding, he sent &Hdotb;usain Beg, a well-known man and one of his own intimates to make enquiries. He also sent a farman in their names that they should move away from the vicinity of Qandahar and go to their own places and abodes, because the friendship and amity of his ancestors with the dignified family of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h were of old standing. That body, before the arrival of &Hdotb;usain Beg and the King&apos;s order, not being able to oppose the royal army, considered the opportunity of returning a favourable one. The said &Hdotb;usain Beg censured the men and started off to wait on me, which he had the honour to do at Lahore. He explained that the ill-fated army which had attacked Qandahar had acted without the order of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s. God forbid (he said) that in consequence of this any unpleasantness should remain in my mind. In short, after the victorious troops reached Qandahar, they, according to orders, delivered the fort over to Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n returned to Court with the relieving force.

<pb id=pb87 n=87><p>On the 27th &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da, &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, having brought R&amacr;m Chand Band&imacr;lah into captivity and chains, brought him before me. I ordered them to take the fetters from his legs, and bestowed on him a robe of honour, and handed him over to R&amacr;ja B&amacr;so that he might take security and release him and a number of his relations who had been captured with him. This through my clemency and kindness came to pass. He had never imagined such clemency and kindness as I showed to him.

<p>On the 2nd &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja I gave my son &Khbarb;urram a <hi>t&umacr;m&amacr;n u t&umacr;&ghbarb;</hi>, a flag and drums, and bestowed on him the rank of 8,000 personal and 5,000 horse, and gave an order for a jagir. On the same day, having exalted P&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n,<note n=1>This is the famous &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n Lod&imacr; of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n&apos;s reign.</note> son of Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n Lod&imacr;, who had come from &Khbarb;andesh with the children of D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, with the title of &Sdotb;al&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n and honoured him with the rank of 3,000 personal and 1,500 horse, and presented him with a standard and drums, I promoted him to the distinction of sonship (<hi>farzand&imacr;</hi>) beyond his fellows and equals. The ancestors and uncles of &Sdotb;al&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s grandfather had been great and honourable among the tribe of Lod&imacr;. An earlier Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, uncle of &Sdotb;al&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s grandfather, when Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m after his father Sikandar&apos;s death, began to behave ill to his father&apos;s amirs and destroyed many, became apprehensive, and sent his younger son, Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, to wait upon H.M. B&amacr;bar in Kabul, and suggested to him the acquisition of Hindustan. As B&amacr;bar also had this enterprise in mind, he at once proceeded in that direction, and did not turn his rein till he reached the neighbourhood of Lahore. Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n with his followers obtained the good fortune to wait upon him, and performed loyal service. As he was an old man, adorned with inward and outward excellencies, he did much good service. He (B&amacr;bar) generally called him &ldquo;father,&rdquo; and entrusting to him as <pb id=pb88 n=88>before<note n=1>Text, <hi>ba dast&umacr;r</hi>.</note> the government of the Panjab placed its amirs and jagirdars under his jurisdiction. Taking Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n with him he (B&amacr;bar) returned to Kabul. When he (B&amacr;bar) came a second time into the Panjab with intent to invade Hindustan, Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n waited on him, and about the same time died. Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n was honoured with the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n and was with B&amacr;bar in the battle he had with Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m. In the same way he was permanently in waiting on the late king Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n. In the <hi>th&amacr;n&amacr;</hi> of Mungir, at the time of his (Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n&apos;s) return from Bengal, he fought bravely against &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n Af&ghbarb;&amacr;n, and was made prisoner on the field of battle. Although &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n urged him to take service with him, he refused and said, &ldquo;Thy ancestors were always the servants of mine: how, then, could I do this?&rdquo; &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n was enraged, and ordered him to be shut up in a wall.<note n=2>I.e. built him up in it.</note>

<p>&ayin;Umar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the grandfather of Sal&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n Farzand, who was cousin of Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, had been treated with respect in the time of Sal&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n. After Sal&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s death and the slaughter of F&imacr;r&umacr;z, his son, at the hand of Mu&hdotb;ammad &Khbarb;&amacr;n, &ayin;Umar &Khbarb;&amacr;n and his brethren became suspicious of Mu&hdotb;ammad &Khbarb;&amacr;n and went to Gujarat, where &ayin;Umar &Khbarb;&amacr;n died. Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, his son, who was a brave young man of pleasant appearance, and good at all things, chose the companionship of &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m, son of Bair&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been dignified with the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n in the reign of Akbar, and performed excellent service. The &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n regarded him as his own brother, or even a thousand times better than his brother, and dearer. Most of the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n&apos;s victories were gained through Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s valour and manliness.<note n=3>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r did not like the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n, and so here belittles his services.</note> When my <pb id=pb89 n=89>revered father, having taken the province of Khandesh and the fort of &Amacr;s&imacr;r, returned to Agra, he left D&amacr;niy&amacr;l in charge of that province and of all the provinces acquired from the rulers of the Deccan. At this time D&amacr;niy&amacr;l had separated Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n from the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n, and was keeping him in attendance on himself and handing over to him for disposal all the business of the State. He showed him much favour and perfect affection until he died in his service. He left two sons, one Mu&hdotb;ammad &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and the other P&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was the elder, died a short time after his father. D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, too, wore himself out with drinking. After my accession I summoned P&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n to Court. As I discovered in him a good disposition and natural abilities, I raised the pedestal of regard for him to the point that has been described. To-day there is not in my government any person of greater influence than he, so much so that on his representation I pass over faults which are not pardoned at the intercession of any of the other servants of the Court. In short, he is a young man of good disposition, brave, and worthy of favour, and what I have done for him has been done rightly, and he will be exalted by further favours.<note n=1>During &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n&apos;s reign, &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n Lod&imacr; fled from Court, was pursued, and killed.</note>

<p>As I had made up my exalted mind to the conquest of M&amacr;war&amacr;&hamza;a-n-nahr (Transoxiana), which was the hereditary kingdom of my ancestors, I desired to free the face of Hindustan from the rubbish of the factious and rebellious, and leaving one of my sons in that country, to go myself with a valiant army in due array, with elephants of mountainous dignity and of lightning speed, and taking ample treasure with me, to undertake the conquest of my ancestral dominions. In accordance with this idea, I despatched Parw&imacr;z to drive back the R&amacr;n&amacr;, and intended to go myself to the Deccan, when just at that moment the <pb id=pb90 n=90>improper action of &Khbarb;usrau took place, and it became necessary to pursue him and put an end to that disturbance. For the same reason, the undertaking of Parw&imacr;z did not assume a promising appearance, and regarding the exigency of the time he gave a respite to the R&amacr;n&amacr;. Bringing with him one of the R&amacr;n&amacr;&apos;s sons, he came to wait on me, and had the bliss of attending me in Lahore. When I was at ease about &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s disturbance, and the repulse of the Qizilb&amacr;shes, who had invested Qandahar, had been brought about in a facile way, it came into my mind to make a hunting tour to Kabul, which is like my native land. After that I would return to Hindustan, when the purposes of my mind would pass from design to action. In pursuance of these steps, on the 7th &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja, at an auspicious hour, I left the fort of Lahore and took up my quarters in the Dil-&amacr;m&imacr;z Garden, which is on the other side of the Ravi, and stayed there four days. Sunday, the 19th Farward&imacr;n, which is the culmination of His Majesty the Sun, I passed in the garden, and some of the servants of the Court were favourably and kindly honoured with increased rank. Ten thousand rupees were bestowed on Hasan Beg, the envoy of the ruler of Persia (&Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s). Leaving Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, M&imacr;r&amacr;n &Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n, and M&imacr;r &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f &Amacr;mul&imacr; in Lahore, I ordered them to settle in consultation any matters that might present themselves. On Monday I marched from the garden mentioned, and encamped at the village of Harhar, 3&frac12; kos distant from the city. On Tuesday the royal standards alighted at Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;rp&umacr;r, which is one of my fixed hunting-places. In this neighbourhood had been erected by my order a <hi>man&amacr;r</hi> at the head of the grave of an antelope called Mansar&amacr;j,<note n=1>Perhaps the antelope&apos;s name was R&amacr;j, and the syllable <hi>man</hi> the pronoun &lsquo;my,&rsquo; when the translation would be &lsquo;my antelope Raj.&rsquo; See Elliot, vi, 302, and R.A.S. MS., No. 124.</note> which was without equal in fights with tame <pb id=pb91 n=91>antelopes and in hunting wild ones. On a stone of that manar was carved this prose composition, written by Mull&amacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain of Kashmir, who was the chief of the elegant writers of the day: &ldquo;In this enchanting place an antelope came into the world-holding (<hi>jah&amacr;n-g&imacr;r&imacr;</hi>) net of the God-knowing ruler N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h. In the space of one month, having overcome his desert fierceness, he became the head of the special antelopes.&rdquo; On account of the rare quality of this antelope, I commanded that no person should hunt the deer of this plain, and that their flesh should be to Hindus and Muhammadans as is the flesh of cows and pigs. They made the gravestone in the shape of an antelope. I ordered Sikandar Mu&ayin;&imacr;n, the jagirdar of the aforesaid pargana, to build a strong fort in the village of Jahangirpur.

<p>On Thursday, the 14th, I encamped in the pargana of Chand&amacr;la.<note n=1>Perhaps the Jandi&amacr;la of the Indian Gazetteer, vii, 137.</note> Thence on Saturday, the 16th, making one stage in the middle, I came to &Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb;&amacr;b&amacr;d.<note n=2>Indian Gazetteer, v, 239.</note> I stayed in the station which had been erected by the exertions of the <hi>karor&imacr;</hi> of that place, M&imacr;r Qiy&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n. Having reached the Chen&amacr;b in two marches on Thursday, the 21st &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja, I crossed the river by a bridge which had been built there and my camp was pitched in the neighbourhood of the pargana of Gujrat. At the time when His Majesty Akbar went to Kashmir, a fort had been built on that bank of the river. Having brought to this fort a body of Gujars who had passed their time in the neighbourhood in thieving and highway robbery, he established them here. As it had become the abode of Gujars, he made it a separate pargana, and gave it the name of Gujrat. They call Gujars a caste which does little manual work and subsists on milk and curds. On Friday I pitched at &Khbarb;aw&amacr;&sdotb;&sdotb;p&umacr;r, five kos from Gujrat, founded by &Khbarb;aw&amacr;ss <pb id=pb92 n=92>&Khbarb;&amacr;n, a slave of &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n Af&ghbarb;&amacr;n. Thence, with two halts in the middle, I pitched on the bank of the Biha&tdotb; (Jhelam). On that night a great wind blew and a black cloud hid the face of the sky. The rain was of such violence that old men remembered none such. It turned to hail, and every hailstone was the size of a hen&apos;s egg. From the flooding of the river and the force of the wind and rain, the bridge broke. I, with the inmates of the harem, crossed in a boat. As there were few boats, I ordered the men not<note n=1>Text omits the negative.</note> to cross in these, but to rebuild the bridge. It was finished in a week, and the whole army crossed with ease. The source of the Biha&tdotb; is a spring in Kashmir called the V&imacr;r-n&amacr;g; in the language of India a snake is <hi>v&imacr;r-n&amacr;g</hi>. Clearly there had been a large snake at that place. I went twice to the spring in my father&apos;s lifetime; it is 20 kos from the city of Kashmir. It is an octagonal reservoir about 20 yards by 20. Near it are the remains of a place of worship for recluses; cells cut out of the rock and numerous caves. The water is exceedingly pure. Although I could not guess its depth, a grain of poppy-seed is visible until it touches the bottom. There were many fish to be seen in it. As I had heard that it was unfathomable, I ordered them to throw in a cord with a stone attached, and when this cord was measured in <hi>gaz</hi> it became evident that the depth was not more than once and a half the height of a man. After my accession I ordered them to build the sides of the spring round with stone, and they made a garden round it with a canal; and built halls and houses about it, and made a place such that travellers over the world can point out few like it. When the river reaches the village of P&amacr;mp&umacr;r, at a distance of ten kos from the city, it increases, and all the saffron of Kashmir is obtained in this village. I do not know if there is so much saffron in any other place in the world. <pb id=pb93 n=93>The annual crop is 500 maunds by Hindustan weight, equal to 5,000 <hi>wil&amacr;yat</hi> (Persian) maunds. In attendance on my revered father, I went to this place at the season when the saffron was in flower. On other plants of the world, first the branches (stems) shoot out and then the leaves and flowers. On the contrary, when the saffron stem is four fingers breadth from the dry ground, its flowers shoot out, of the colour of the iris,<note n=1>Text, <hi>s&umacr;san&imacr;</hi>; apparently a blue iris.</note> with four petals, and in the middle are four threads (<hi>r&imacr;&shbarb;a</hi>) of an orange colour like that of the flower, and of the length of a finger-joint. This is the saffron. The land is not ploughed<note n=2>The text has <hi>&shbarb;um&amacr;r</hi> wrongly for <hi>&shbarb;iy&amacr;r</hi>, and it seems that the negative of the text is wrong, since it does not occur in the MSS. Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l gives the number of petals and stamens more correctly than Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r.</note> or irrigated, the plant springs up amongst the clods. In some places its cultivation extends for a kos, and in others for half a kos. It looks better from a distance. At the time of plucking, all my attendants got headache from its sharp scent. Though I drank wine and took a cup, I too got headache. I asked the animal-like Kashmiris, who were employed in picking the flowers how they felt. I ascertained that they had never experienced headache in their lives.

<p>The waters from the spring V&imacr;r-n&amacr;g and of other streams and nullahs that join from right and left form the river Bihat, which passes through the heart of the city. Its breadth in most places is not more than a bowshot.<note n=3><hi>Az tikka and&amacr;z&imacr;</hi>; perhaps &lsquo;the cast of a javelin.&rsquo;</note> No one drinks its water, because of its heaviness and indigestibility. All the people of Kashmir drink the water of a lake that is near the city, and is called Dall. The river Bihat enters this lake and flows through to the Panjab by the B&amacr;r&amacr;m&umacr;la Pass, Pakl&imacr;, and Dant&umacr;r.

<pb id=pb94 n=94><p>In Kashmir there is plenty of water from streams and springs. By far the best is that of the L&amacr;r valley, which joins the Bihat in the village of &Shbarb;ih&amacr;bu-d-d&imacr;n-p&umacr;r. This village is one of the celebrated places of Kashmir, and is on the Bihat. About a hundred plane-trees (<hi>chan&amacr;r</hi>) of graceful form clustered<note n=1>Lit. &lsquo;have joined hands.&rsquo;</note> together on one plot of ground, pleasant and green, join each other so as to shade the whole plot, and the whole surface of the ground is grass and trefoil<note n=2><hi>Sih-barga</hi>; but this reading seems doubtful; perhaps it is <hi>s&imacr;r-i-barga</hi>, full of leaves. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r says that to lay a carpet on the grass would be <hi>b&imacr;-dard&imacr;</hi>, unfeeling, unsympathetic, and <hi>kam sal&imacr;qag&imacr;</hi>.</note>; so much so that to lay a carpet on it would be superfluous and in bad taste. The village was founded by Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Zainu-l-&ayin;&amacr;bid&imacr;n, who for 52 years ruled Kashmir with absolute sway. They speak of him as the great P&amacr;dsh&amacr;h. They tell many strange customs of his. There are many remains and traces of buildings of his in Kashmir. One of these is in the midst of a lake called Wul&umacr;r, and of which the length and breadth are more than three or four kos. It is called Zain-lank&amacr;, and in making it they have exerted themselves greatly. The springs of this lake are very deep. The first time they brought a large quantity of stone in boats and poured it on the place where now the building stands it had no result. At last they sank some thousands of boats with stones, and with great labour recovered a piece of ground 100 gaz by 100 gaz out of the water, and made a terrace, and on one side thereof the Sultan erected a temple for the worship of his supreme God. Than this there is no finer place.<note n=3>The text has <hi>naq&shbarb; bar j&amacr;y</hi>, but the true reading seems to be <hi>naf&imacr;&zdotb;tar</hi>.</note> He often came to the spot by boat and engaged in worship of the King of Wisdom. They say he spent many &ldquo;forty days&rdquo; in that place. One day a wicked son of his came to that place to kill him, and finding him alone, drew a sword and went in. When his eye fell on the Sultan, <pb id=pb95 n=95>however, on account of his venerable dignity and the might of his virtues, he became confused and bewildered and turned away. The Sultan shortly after came out and seated himself in the boat with this same son, and started for the city. On the way he said to his son, &ldquo;I have forgotten my rosary; get into a canoe and fetch it for me.&rdquo; The son having gone into the temple sees his father in the same place, and the graceless man with complete shame of face falls at his father&apos;s feet and asks pardon for his fault. They have told many tales of such miracles as this of him, and they say also that he had well practised the science of <hi>&khbarb;ala&ayin;</hi>.<note n=1><hi>&ayin;Ilm-i-&khbarb;ala&ayin;-i-badan</hi>, &lsquo;withdrawal of the soul from the body&rsquo; (Erskine).</note> When, from the ways and methods of his sons, he perceived in them signs of haste in seeking for rule and government, he would say to them, &ldquo;To me it is very easy to abandon rule, and even to pass away from life, but when I am gone you will do nothing and the time of your prosperity will not endure long, but in a short time you will obtain the recompense of your evil deeds and your own dispositions.&rdquo; Having spoken thus, he gave up eating and drinking, and passed forty days in this manner. He made not his eye acquainted with sleep, and employed himself after the manner of men of piety and austerity in the worship of God Almighty. On the fortieth day he gave up the deposit of his existence, and entered into the mercy of God. He left three sons&mdash;&Amacr;dam &Khbarb;&amacr;n, &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and Bahr&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n. They quarrelled with each other, and all three were ruined. The government of Kashmir was transferred to the tribe of the Chaks, who belonged to the class of the common soldiers of the country. During their dynasty three of the rulers constructed buildings on three sides of the terrace formed by Zainu-l-&ayin;&amacr;bid&imacr;n in the Wulur Lake, but none of these is as strong as his.

<pb id=pb96 n=96><p>Autumn and Spring in Kashmir are things worthy to be seen. I witnessed the Autumn season, and it appeared to me to be better than what I had heard of it. I have never seen Spring in that province, but hope to do so some day. On Saturday the 1st of Mu&hdotb;arram (18th April, 1607) I left the bank of the Bihat, and with one day between reached the fort of Roht&amacr;s, which was built by &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n Af&ghbarb;&amacr;n. This fort was founded in a cleft of the ground, and the strength of it cannot be imagined. As the place is near the Ghakhar territory, and they are a proud and rebellious people, he had looked to this fort specially as a means of punishing and defeating them. When a little of the building had been done &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n died and his son, Sal&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, obtained the grace to complete it. On each of the gates<note n=1>So in text, but the MSS. and Elliot, vi, 307, have &ldquo;on one of the gates.&rdquo;</note> they have carved on a stone the cost of erecting the fort; 16 krors, 10 lakhs of dams, and more were expended, equal in Hindustan reckoning to 4,025,000 rupees, and according to the currency of Iran to 120,000 <hi>t&umacr;man</hi>, and in the currency of Turan to 1 <hi>arb</hi>, 21 lakhs and 75,000 <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>, that are now current.<note n=2>The figures seem wrong, and the MSS. differ. See Elliot, vi, 307. Apparently the correct sum in rupees is 34 lakhs 25,000. At p. 61 the khani of Turan is reckoned at one-third of a rupee. If the dam be taken at its ordinary value of one-fortieth of a rupee, the number of rupees should be 40 lakhs 25,000, and if the khani of Turan be one-third of a rupee we should read one kror instead of one arb. Probably Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r has used arb as meaning kror, and not 100 krors. There is a valuable note on his expedition through the Ghakkar country in Blochmann, p. 486. Blochmann takes the figures for the rupees to be four krors, but probably this is due to wrong pointing.</note>

<p>On Tuesday the 4th of the month, having travelled four kos and three-quarters, I encamped at T&imacr;la.<note n=3>The MSS. and text have Pila or P&imacr;la. I adopt T&imacr;la from Blochmann, p. 487, note. Elliot has Tillah, vi, 307, and note.</note> Thence I came down to the village of Bhakra. In the Ghakhar <pb id=pb97 n=97>tongue <hi>bhakra</hi><note n=1>In Tolbort&apos;s account of L&umacr;dhiy&amacr;na, J.A.S.B. for 1869, p. 86, <hi>bhakhra</hi> is given as the name of a creeping plant (<hi>Pedalium murex</hi>).</note> is a jungle. The jungle was composed of clusters of flowers, white and scentless. I came the whole way from T&imacr;la to Bhakra in the middle of the river-bed,<note n=2><hi>R&umacr;d-&khbarb;&amacr;na</hi>; this, according to Blochmann, should be the river Kahan, <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;na</hi> being a mistake for Kahan. See p. 487 note. But all the MSS. have <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;na</hi>.</note> which had running water in it, with oleander flowers of the colour of peach-blossom. In Hindustan this plant is always in full bloom (<hi>purb&amacr;r</hi>). There was much of it on the banks of this river. The horsemen and men on foot who were with me were told to put bunches of the flower on their heads, and whoever did not do so had his turban taken off; a wonderful flower-bed was produced.

<p>On Thursday the 6th of the month the halting-place was at Haty&amacr;. On this road many pal&amacr;s-trees (<hi>Butea frondosa</hi>) were in blossom. This flower, too, is peculiar to the jungles of Hindustan; it has no scent, but its colour is flaming orange. The base of the flower is black; the flower itself is as big as a red rose. It is so beautiful that one cannot take one&apos;s eyes off it. As the air was very sweet and clouds had hidden the sun, and rain was gently sprinkled about, I felt an inclination to drink wine. In short this road was traversed with great enjoyment and pleasure. They call the place Haty&amacr; because it was founded by a Ghakkar named H&amacr;thi (elephant). From M&amacr;rgala to Haty&amacr; the country is called Poth&umacr;w&amacr;r.<note n=3>See Elliot, vi, 309 note.</note> In these regions there are few crows. From Roht&amacr;s to Haty&amacr; is the place and abode of the Bh&umacr;gy&amacr;ls,<note n=4>B&umacr;gy&amacr;ls; Elliot, vi, 309. They are descendants of Sult&amacr;n B&umacr;g&amacr;.</note> who are related to and of the same ancestry as the Ghakkars.

<p>Marching on Friday the 7th, I travelled 4&frac12; kos and alighted at the station of Pakka.<note n=5>Paka is mentioned in Tiefenthaler, i, 114.</note> This place is called <pb id=pb98 n=98>Pakka because the <hi>sar&amacr;y</hi> is of burnt brick, and in the Hindi language what is ripe (that is, not raw material) is called <hi>pakka</hi>. The station was strangely full of dust and earth. The carts reached it with great difficulty owing to the badness of the road. They had brought from Kabul to this place <hi>r&imacr;w&amacr;j</hi> (rhubarb), which was mostly spoiled.

<p>On Saturday the 8th we marched 4&frac12; kos and encamped at the village of Khar.<note n=1>Khor; Elliot, vi, 309 note. Near the M&amacr;niky&amacr;la tope.</note> <hi>Khar</hi> in the Ghakkar language is a rent and breakage. There are few trees in this country. On Sunday the 9th I halted beyond R&amacr;walpind&imacr;. This place was founded by a Hindu named R&amacr;wal, and <hi>pind&imacr;</hi> in the Ghakkar tongue means a village. In the valley near this station there was a stream flowing, the waters of which were collected in a pool. As this halting-place was not devoid of freshness I alighted there for a time, and I asked the Ghakkars the depth of the pool. They gave me no precise answer, but said they had heard from their fathers that there were alligators in the pool which wounded animals that came there, and on that account no one had the boldness to go in. I ordered them to throw in a sheep. It swam across the pool and came out. I then ordered a <hi>farr&amacr;&shbarb;</hi> to go in, and he also came out safe. It thus became clear that there was no foundation for what the Ghakkars had said. The pool was an arrow&apos;s flight in width.

<p>On Monday the 10th the village of &Khbarb;arb&umacr;za<note n=2>&Khbarb;arb&umacr;za Sar&amacr;y is marked on Elphinstone&apos;s map.</note> was our stage. The Ghakkars in earlier times had built a dome here and taken tolls from travellers. As the dome was shaped like a melon it became known by that name. On Tuesday the 11th I halted at K&amacr;la-p&amacr;n&imacr;, which in Hindi means black water. There is a mountain pass (<hi>kotal</hi>) at this place called M&amacr;rgalla; in Hindi <hi>m&amacr;r</hi> means <pb id=pb99 n=99>to beat and <hi>galla</hi> is a caravan, the name therefore means the place of the plundering of the caravan. The boundary of the Ghakkar country is here. This tribe are wonderfully like animals; they are always squabbling and fighting with one another. Although I wished to put an end to this fighting, I was unable to do so.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;The soul of the fool is doomed to trouble.&rdquo;<note n=1>Mr. Rogers has &ldquo;The soul of the fool thou canst purchase for little.&rdquo; Perhaps the sense is &ldquo;God grants life to the fool on hard terms.&rdquo; Erskine has &ldquo;To serve a fool is hard indeed.&rdquo; Possibly the literal meaning is &ldquo;You buy the soul of the fool at a high price,&rdquo; that is, it costs a great deal to win him over. Elliot had what is probably the best rendering, &ldquo;Barbarous characters should be treated with severity&rdquo;; though in Elliot, vi, 310, the translation is, &ldquo;The life of fools is held very cheap in troublous times.&rdquo;</note>
</lg>


<p>On Wednesday the 12th the camp was at B&amacr;b&amacr; &Hdotb;asan Abd&amacr;l. One kos to the east of this station there is a waterfall over which the stream rushes with great force. There is no fall like it on the way to Kabul. On the road to Kashmir there are two or three like it.<note n=2>Apparently this remark must have been written after Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s visit to Kashmir by the B&amacr;ram&umacr;la route in the fourteenth year.</note>

<p>In the middle of the basin, in which is the source of the stream, R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh has erected a small building. There are many fish in the basin of the length of half a gaz and a quarter gaz. I halted three days at this enchanting place, drinking wine with those who were intimate with me and employing myself in catching fish. Until now I had never thrown a <hi>sufra</hi> net, which is a famous kind of net, and which in Hindi they call <hi>bhanwar</hi><note n=3><hi>Bhanwar</hi>, as Mr. Lowe has pointed out, means in Hindi an eddy or whirlpool.</note> <hi>j&amacr;l</hi>. It is not easy to throw. I threw it with my own hand and caught twelve fish, and putting pearls into their noses,<note n=4>William Finch says that at &Hdotb;asan Abd&amacr;l there were many fish with gold rings in their noses hung by Akbar, and that the water is so clear that you may see a penny in the bottom. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s informants were <pb>apparently not versed in hagiography. B&amacr;b&amacr; &Hdotb;asan Abd&amacr;l is apparently the saint who was an ancestor of Ma&ayin;&sdotb;&umacr;m Bhakar&imacr;, and is buried at Qandahar. See Beale, and Jarrett&apos;s translation of the &Amacr;y&imacr;n, ii, 324 note. The Sikhs identify the place with their B&amacr;b&amacr; N&amacr;nak. It is not a wife of Akbar who is buried at &Hdotb;asan Abd&amacr;l, but &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Ab&umacr;-l-fat&hdotb; and his brother.</note> let them loose in the water. I enquired <pb id=pb100 n=100>into the story of B&amacr;b&amacr; &Hdotb;asan from the story-tellers and from the inhabitants of the place, but no one could tell me any particulars. The celebrated place at that station is a spring which flows from the foot of a little hill, exceedingly clear, sweet, and nice, as witness this couplet of Am&imacr;r &Khbarb;usrau:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;In the bottom of the water, from its clearness, a blind man
    <l>Can count the sand-grains in the heart of the night.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>&Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &Shbarb;amsu-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad &Khbarb;w&amacr;f&imacr;, who was for long employed as Vizier by my revered father, had made a platform and a reservoir there, into which is led the water from the spring, and thence is used in cultivation and in gardens. On the edge of this terrace he had built a dome for his own burial. By chance his destiny was not there, and (the bodies of) &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Ab&umacr;-l-fat&hdotb; G&imacr;l&amacr;n&imacr; and his brother &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Hum&amacr;m, who were close to the person and had the complete confidence of my revered father, were placed in that dome in accordance with his order.

<p>On the 15th the halt was at Amroh&imacr;.<note n=1>Elliot has Amard&imacr;, but the MSS. have Amroh&imacr;. The Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, ii, 755, has &Amacr;hr&umacr;&hamza;&imacr;. See Blochmann, p. 522.</note> It is a wonderfully green place, in which no ups and downs were visible. In this village and its neighbourhood there are 7,000 or 8,000 households of Khaturs and Dal&amacr;z&amacr;ks. All kinds of mischief and oppression and highway robbery take place through this tribe. I ordered the government of this region and Attock to be given to &Zumlb;afar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Zain &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka, and that by the time of the return of the royal standards from Kabul they should march all the Dal&amacr;z&amacr;ks to Lahore and capture the head men of the Khaturs and keep them in prison.

<pb id=pb101 n=101><p>On Monday, the 17th, a march was made, and, with one stage in between, the royal standards alighted near the fort of Attock on the bank of the river N&imacr;l&amacr;b (Indus). At this stage Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n was promoted to the rank of 2,500. This fort was built by the late king Akbar, and was completed by the labours of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &Shbarb;amsu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;w&amacr;f&imacr;. It is a strong fort. At this time the water of the N&imacr;l&amacr;b was low,<note n=1><hi>Az &tumlb;a&ghbarb;y&amacr;n far&umacr;d &amacr;mada.</hi> Perhaps the meaning is exactly the opposite, viz. &lsquo;had come down in violence.&rsquo; But if so, could a bridge have been made, and with eighteen boats? The time was the 4th or 5th May. Elliot has &ldquo;the N&imacr;l&amacr;b was very full.&rdquo;</note> and accordingly a bridge had been made with eighteen boats, and the people crossed over easily. I left the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; at Attock on account of weakness of body and illness. An order was given to the bakhshis that, as the province of Kabul could not support a large army, they should only allow the immediate attendants of the Court to cross the river, and until the return of the royal standards the royal camp should remain at Attock. On Wednesday, the 19th, with the princes and some of the private servants, having mounted on to a raft (with inflated skins underneath), and having crossed the river N&imacr;l&amacr;b safely, I alighted on the bank of the river K&amacr;ma. The K&amacr;ma is a river that flows by the <hi>qa&sdotb;ba</hi> (fortified town) of Jal&amacr;l&amacr;b&amacr;d. The <hi>j&amacr;la</hi> is a structure they make of bamboos and grass and place underneath it skins full of air. In this province they call them <hi>&shbarb;&amacr;l</hi> (or <hi>s&amacr;l</hi>). In rivers and streams in which there are rocks they are safer than boats. 12,000 rupees were given to M&imacr;r &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f &Amacr;mul&imacr; and to a number of men, who had been appointed to perform services at Lahore, to divide amongst the faqirs. An order was given to &ayin;Abdu-r-Razz&amacr;q Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r&imacr;<note n=2>According to the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, iii, 376, Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r is a village in Arabia.</note> and to Bih&amacr;r&imacr; D&amacr;s, bakhshi of the Ahadis, to complete the force that had been appointed <pb id=pb102 n=102>to accompany &Zumlb;afar &Khbarb;&amacr;n and send them away. With one stage in between, the camp halted at the saray of B&amacr;ra. On the other side of the river K&amacr;ma there is a fort which Zain &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka built at the time when he was appointed to subjugate the Y&umacr;sufza&hamza;e Afghans, and called Nau&shbarb;ahr (Newcastle). About 50,000 rupees were spent upon it. They say that Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n used to hunt rhinoceros in this region. I also heard from my father that he had twice or thrice witnessed such a hunt in the company of his father. On Thursday, the 25th, I alighted at the saray of Daulat&amacr;b&amacr;d. A&hdotb;mad Beg of Kabul, jagirdar of Peshawar, with the Maliks of the Y&umacr;sufza&hamza;es and the &Ghbarb;oriya-khel, came and waited on me. As the service of A&hdotb;mad Beg was not approved, I transferred him from that territory (wil&amacr;yat) and conferred it on &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the Afghan. On Wednesday, the 26th, I encamped in the garden of Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which he had made in the neighbourhood of Peshawar. I walked round Ghorkhatr&imacr;, which is the worshipping-place of the jog&imacr;s in this neighbourhood, with the idea that I might see some faqirs from association with whom I might obtain grace. But that was like looking for the ph&oelig;nix or the philosopher&apos;s stone. A herd without any religious knowledge came to my view, from seeing whom I derived nothing but obscurity of mind. On Thursday, the 27th, I arrived at the halting-place of Jamr&umacr;d, and on Friday, 28th, at the &Khbarb;aibar Kotal (Khyber Pass) and encamped at &ayin;Al&imacr; Masjid, and on Saturday I traversed the tortuous (<hi>m&amacr;rp&imacr;ch</hi>, i.e. snake-twisting) Pass, and alighted at &Ghbarb;ar&imacr;b-&khbarb;&amacr;na. At this stage Ab&umacr;-l-q&amacr;sim Namak&imacr;n, Jagirdar of Jal&amacr;l&amacr;b&amacr;d, brought an apricot, which was not inferior in beauty to good Kashmir apricots. At the stage of Daka they brought from Kabul <hi>g&imacr;l&amacr;s</hi> (cherries), which my revered father had entitled <hi>&Shbarb;&amacr;h-&amacr;l&umacr;</hi>. As I was much inclined to eat them, inasmuch as I had not (hitherto?) obtained them, I ate them with great zest as a relish to wine. On Tuesday, <pb id=pb103 n=103>2nd &Sdotb;afar, I encamped at Bas&amacr;wal, which is on the bank of the river. On the other side of the river there is a mountain which has no trees or grass on it, and on that account they call this mountain the hill of B&imacr;daulat (unfortunate). I heard from my father that in mountains like this there are mines of gold. On the mountain of &Amacr;la B&umacr;gh&amacr;n, at the time when my revered father went to Kabul, I had had a <hi>qamarg&amacr;h</hi> hunt, and killed several<note n=1>The MSS. have <hi>&sdotb;ad</hi> instead of <hi>chand</hi>, i.e. 100.</note> red deer. As I had handed over the administration of all civil affairs to the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr;, and his illness increased greatly, and forgetfulness came over his faculties to such an extent that what was settled in one hour he forgot in the next, and his forgetfulness was increasing day by day, on Wednesday, the 3rd &Sdotb;afar, I entrusted the duties of the viziership to &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, presenting him with a special robe of honour, and inkstand and a jewelled pen. It was a remarkable coincidence that twenty-eight years previously to this, at the same halting-place, my revered father had promoted him<note n=2>This &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n is Qaw&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n Ja&ayin;far Beg and the No. iii of Blochmann, p. 411. Apparently his appointment as Mir Bakhshi was made in 989 (1581), in which year Akbar went to Kabul. Blochmann says &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n was made Mir Bakhshi in the room of Q&amacr;&zdotb;&imacr; &ayin;Al&imacr;, and we find at p. 372 of A. N., iii, that Q&amacr;&zdotb;&imacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; Ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr; was appointed in that year to the Panjab. Twenty-eight years before 1016 (to the beginning of which Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r is referring) yields 988. Bas&amacr;wal is on right bank of Kabul River below Jal&amacr;l&amacr;b&amacr;d.</note> to the rank of M&imacr;r Ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr; (chief paymaster). A ruby which his brother<note n=3>Text <hi>baul&imacr;</hi>, but the MSS. have <hi>l&umacr;l&imacr;</hi>, i.e. dancing-girl.</note> Ab&umacr;-l-q&amacr;sim had bought for 40,000 rupees and sent him, he presented as an offering on obtaining the viziership. He petitioned that &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan, who held the offices of bakhshi and the <hi>Q&umacr;r</hi>, etc., might go with him. Jal&amacr;l&amacr;b&amacr;d was transferred from Ab&umacr;-l-q&amacr;sim Namak&imacr;n to Arab &Khbarb;&amacr;n. A white rock was present in the river-bed; I ordered them to carve it in the form of an elephant <pb id=pb104 n=104>and cut upon its breast this hemistich, which agrees with the date of the Hijra year: &ldquo;The white stone elephant of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h,&rdquo; that is, 1016.

<p>On the same day Kaly&amacr;n, son of R&amacr;ja Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, came from Gujarat. Certain extraordinary proceedings on the part of this rebellious rascal had been reported to me. Amongst these was this. He had kept a <corr sic="Musulm&amacr;n">Musulman</corr> <hi>l&umacr;l&imacr;</hi> woman in his house, and for fear this affair should become known had killed her father and mother and buried them in his house. I ordered that he should be imprisoned until I could enquire into his proceedings, and after ascertaining the truth I ordered first that they should cut out his tongue and place him in perpetual confinement, and that he should eat his food with dog-keepers and outcasts. On Wednesday I encamped at Sur&khbarb;&amacr;b. Thence I alighted at Jagdalak. At this stage I saw many <hi>ball&umacr;&tumlb;</hi><note n=1>Generally spelt <hi>ball&umacr;&tumlb;</hi>, either the oak or the chestnut. Cf. Erskine&apos;s Baber, p. 145. Sir Alexander Burnes calls the <hi>ball&umacr;&tumlb;</hi> the holly.</note>-trees (oak or chestnut), which are the best wood for burning. Although this stage had neither passes nor declivities there were plenty of rocks. On Friday, the 12th, I encamped at &Amacr;b-i-b&amacr;r&imacr;k, and Saturday, the 13th, at Y&umacr;rt-i-p&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h. On Sunday, the 14th, I alighted at &Khbarb;&umacr;rd K&amacr;bul (little Kabul). At this stage I entrusted the Chief Justiceship and Qaziship of the city of Kabul to Q&amacr;&zdotb;&imacr; &ayin;&Amacr;rif, son of Mull&amacr; S&amacr;diq Halw&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;. They brought some ripe <hi>&shbarb;&amacr;h-&amacr;l&umacr;</hi> (cherries) from the village of Gulbah&amacr;r to this place; of these I ate with much enjoyment nearly a hundred. Daulat, the head of the village of Jigr&imacr;<note n=2>See below, p. 52, where the <hi>Ra&hamza;&imacr;s</hi> or headman of Chikr&imacr; is mentioned.</note>(?), brought some uncommon flowers, such as I had never seen in my life. Thence I alighted at Bikr&amacr;m&imacr;. At this place they brought to show me a piebald<note n=3>Cf. Erskine&apos;s Baber, p. 145.</note> animal, like the flying (i.e. jumping) mouse, which in the Hindi tongue they call <hi>galahr&imacr;</hi> (squirrel), and said that mice would not <pb id=pb105 n=105>frequent any house in which this animal was. On this account they call this animal the master of mice. As I had never seen one before, I ordered my painters to draw a likeness of it. It is larger than a mongoose. On the whole it is very like a civet cat. Having appointed A&hdotb;mad Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n to punish the Afghans of Banga&shbarb;, I ordered &ayin;Abdu-r-Razz&amacr;q Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r&imacr;, who was in Attock, to take 2,000,000 rupees under the charge of Mohan D&amacr;s, son of R&amacr;ja Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, with him, and divide it among the auxiliaries of the aforesaid army. One thousand musketeers were also ordered to accompany this army.

<p>&Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;m&amacr;n, son of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l, was promoted to the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse, and obtained the title of Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n. 15,000 rupees were presented to &ayin;Arab &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and 20,000 rupees more for the repair of the fort of Pe&shbarb; Bul&amacr;&ghbarb;.<note n=1>The fort of Pe&shbarb; Bul&amacr;q is mentioned in the third volume of the Akbar-n&amacr;ma, p. 512. It is marked on the map of Afghanistan between Daka and Jal&amacr;l&amacr;b&amacr;d.</note> I bestowed Sark&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;np&umacr;r<note n=2><hi>Sic</hi> in text, but should be Jaunp&umacr;r as in the MSS.</note> in fief on Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n Af&ghbarb;&amacr;n. On Thursday, the 17th, from the Mast&amacr;n bridge as far as the &Shbarb;ahr-&amacr;r&amacr; garden, which was the encamping place for the royal standards, scattering rupees, half-rupees, and quarter-rupees to faqirs and indigent persons on both sides of the road, I entered the aforesaid garden. It appeared to be very green and fresh. As it was a Thursday I gave a wine entertainment to my intimates, and on account of hilarity and excitement ordered those who were of equal age to myself and had been my playfellows to jump over the stream that flowed through the middle of the garden and was about four gaz in width. Most of them could not jump it, and fell on the bank or into the stream. Although I jumped it, yet now that I was 40 years of age I could not jump it with the <pb id=pb106 n=106>activity that I had shown in the presence of my revered father when I was 30. On this day I perambulated seven of the famous gardens of Kabul. I do not think that I ever walked so far before.

<p>First of all I walked round the &Shbarb;ahr-&amacr;r&amacr; (city-adorning), then the Maht&amacr;b (moonlight) garden, then the garden that B&imacr;ka Begam, grandmother of my father, had made, then passed through the &Umacr;rta-b&amacr;&ghbarb; (middle garden), then a garden that Maryam-mak&amacr;n&imacr;, my own grandmother, had prepared, then the &Sdotb;&umacr;rat-&khbarb;&amacr;na garden, which has a large <hi>chan&amacr;r</hi>-tree, the like of which there is not in the other gardens of Kabul. Then, having seen the Ch&amacr;rb&amacr;&ghbarb;, which is the largest of the city gardens, I returned to my own abode. There were abundance of cherries on the trees, each of which looked as it were a round ruby, hanging like globes on the branches. The &Shbarb;ahr-&amacr;r&amacr; garden was made by &Shbarb;ahr-b&amacr;n&umacr;<note n=1>There was also a &Shbarb;ahr-b&amacr;n&umacr; who was B&amacr;bar&apos;s sister. B&imacr;ka Begam was B&amacr;bar&apos;s widow and the lady who carried his bones to Kabul.</note> Begam, daughter of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Ab&umacr; Sa&ayin;&imacr;d, who was own aunt to the late king B&amacr;bar. From time to time it has been added to, and there is not a garden like it for sweetness in Kabul. It has all sorts of fruits and grapes, and its softness is such that to put one&apos;s sandalled<note n=2><hi>Bakaf&shbarb;-p&amacr;y</hi>, which Erskine renders &lsquo;with slippers on&rsquo; and Elliot &lsquo;with his shoes on.&rsquo;</note> feet on it would be far from propriety or good manners. In the neighbourhood of this garden an excellent plot of land came to view, which I ordered to be bought from the owners. I ordered a stream that flows from the <hi>gu&zbarb;arg&amacr;h</hi> (ferry, also bleaching green) to be diverted into the middle of the ground so that a garden might be made such that in beauty and sweetness there should not be in the inhabited world another like it. I gave it the name of Jah&amacr;n-&amacr;r&amacr; (world-adorning). Whilst I was at Kabul I had several entertainments in the &Shbarb;ahr-&amacr;r&amacr; garden, <pb id=pb107 n=107>sometimes with my intimates and courtiers and sometimes with the ladies of the harem. At nights I ordered the learned and the students of Kabul to hold the cooking entertainment,<note n=1>B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d Biy&amacr;t describes Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n as holding a cooking festival in Bada&khbarb;&shbarb;&amacr;n. See A.N., i, translation, p. 496, n. 2. They cooked <hi>bu&ghbarb;ra</hi>, which appears to be macaroni. The text wrongly has <hi>raq&zdotb; az &ayin;i&shbarb;q</hi> (love-dances). The real word, as the MSS. show, is <hi>ar&ghbarb;u&shbarb;taq</hi>, which is a kind of dance (not a child&apos;s game as in Johnson). It is described in Vullers, s.v., in accordance with the account in the Burh&amacr;n-i-q&amacr;&tumlb;i&ayin;. It is a dance by girls or young men, and is accompanied with singing and with clapping of hands, etc. Probably it is the dance described by Elphinstone in his account of Kabul, i, 311, where he says: &ldquo;The great delight of all the western Afghans is to dance the Attun or Ghoomboor. From ten to twenty men or women stand up in a circle (in summer before their houses and tents, and in winter round a fire); a person stands within the circle to sing and play on some instrument. The dancers go through a number of attitudes and figures; shouting, clapping their hands, and snapping their fingers. Every now and then they join hands, and move slow or fast according to the music, all joining in chorus. When I was showed this, a love-song was sung to an extremely pretty tune, very simple, and not unlike a Scottish air.&rdquo; Erskine&apos;s translation is: &ldquo;Custards and confections were presented, and the amusements of dancing girls and arghustak were introduced.&rdquo;</note> <hi>bu&ghbarb;ra</hi>, and the throwing of bu&ghbarb;ra, together with <hi>ar&ghbarb;u&shbarb;tak</hi> dances.

<p>To each of the band of <hi>Bu&ghbarb;r&amacr;&hamza;iy&amacr;n</hi> I gave a dress of honour, and also gave 1,000 rupees to divide amongst themselves. To twelve of the trustworthy courtiers I ordered 12,000 rupees to be given, to be bestowed every Thursday, as long as I was in Kabul, on the poor and needy. I gave an order that between two plane-trees that were on the canal bank in the middle of the garden&mdash;to one of which I had given the name of Far&amacr;&hdotb;-ba&khbarb;&shbarb; (joy-giver) and the other S&amacr;ya-ba&khbarb;&shbarb; (shade-giver)&mdash;they should set up a piece of white stone (marble?) one gaz in length and three-quarters of a gaz in breadth, and engrave my name thereon (and those of my ancestors) up to T&imacr;m&umacr;r. It was set forth on the other side that I had done away with the whole of the customs dues and charges of Kabul, and whichever of my <pb id=pb108 n=108>descendants and successors should do anything contrary to this would be involved in the wrath and displeasure of God. Up to the time of my accession these were fixed and settled, and every year they took large sums on this account from the servants of God (the Muhammadan people in general). The abolition of this oppression was brought about during my reign. On this journey to Kabul complete relief and contentment were brought about in the circumstances of my subjects and the people of that place. The good and leading men of &Ghbarb;azn&imacr;n and that neighbourhood were presented with robes of honour and dealt kindly with, and had their desires excellently gratified.

<p>It is a strange coincidence that (the words) <hi>r&umacr;z-i-panj&shbarb;anba h&imacr;&zhbarb;daham-i-&Sdotb;afar</hi>,<note n=1>The words seem to me to yield 1066, but if we read <hi>paj&shbarb;anba</hi> instead of <hi>panj&shbarb;anba</hi> we get 1016, which is the Hijra date of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s entry into Kabul and corresponds to 4th June, 1607. A marginal note on I.O.M. 305 makes the chronogram clear by writing <hi>r&umacr;z-i-panchanba hi&zhbarb;dah-i-&Sdotb;afar</hi>, thereby getting rid of the <hi>m&imacr;m</hi> and the <hi>y&amacr;</hi> of <hi>h&imacr;&zhbarb;daham</hi> and bringing out the figures 1016.</note> Thursday, 18th &Sdotb;afar, which is the date of my entry into Kabul, give the Hijra date thereof.

<p>I ordered them to inscribe this date on the stone. Near a seat (<hi>ta&khbarb;t</hi>) on the slope of a hill to the south of the city of Kabul, and which is known as Ta&khbarb;t-i-&shbarb;&amacr;h, they have made a stone terrace where Fird&umacr;s-mak&amacr;n&imacr; (B&amacr;bar) used to sit and drink wine. In one corner of this rock they have excavated a round basin which could contain about two Hindustani maunds of wine. He caused his own blessed name with the date to be carved on the wall of the terrace which is next to the hill. The wording is, &ldquo;The seat of the king, the asylum of the world, &Zumlb;ah&imacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad B&amacr;bar, son of &ayin;Umar &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; G&umacr;rg&amacr;n, may God perpetuate his kingdom, 914 (1508&ndash;9).&rdquo; I also ordered them to cut out of stone another throne parallel <pb id=pb109 n=109>to this, and dig another basin of the same fashion on its side, and engrave my name there, together with that of &Sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ib-qir&amacr;n&imacr; (T&imacr;m&umacr;r). Every day that I sat on that throne I ordered them to fill both of the basins with wine and give it to the servants who were present there. One of the poets of Ghaznin found the date of my coming to Kabul in this chronogram&mdash;&ldquo;The king of the cities of the seven climes&rdquo; (1016). I gave him a dress of honour and a present, and ordered them to engrave this date on the wall near the aforesaid seat. Fifty thousand rupees were given to Parw&imacr;z; Waz&imacr;r-al-mulk was made Mir Bakhshi. A firman was sent to Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n to despatch 170,000 rupees from the Lahore treasury for expenses of the army at Qandahar. After visiting the &Khbarb;iy&amacr;b&amacr;n (avenue) of Kabul and the B&imacr;b&imacr; M&amacr;h-r&umacr;, I ordered the governor of that city to plant other trees in the place of those cut down by &Hdotb;usain Beg R&umacr;-siy&amacr;h (the black-faced). I also visited the &Umacr;lang-y&umacr;rt of Ch&amacr;l&amacr;k and found it a very pleasant place. The Ra&apos;is of Chikr&imacr; (Jigr&imacr;?) shot with an arrow a <hi>rang</hi><note n=1>Evidently a kind of sheep.</note> and brought it to me. Up to this time I had never seen a rang. It is like a mountain goat, and there is a difference only in its horns. The horns of the rang are bent, and those of the goat are straight and convoluted.

<p>In connection with the account of Kabul the commentaries of B&amacr;bar<note n=2>This is a reference to B&amacr;bar&apos;s Memoirs.</note> passed in view before me. These were in his own handwriting, except four sections (<hi>juz&hamza;</hi><note n=3>A <hi>juz&hamza;</hi> is said to consist of eight leaves or sixteen pages. Does Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r mean that he wrote sixty-four pages?</note>) that I wrote myself. At the end of the said sections a sentence was written by me also in the Turk&imacr; character, so that it might be known that these four sections were written by me in my own hand. Notwithstanding that I grew up in Hindustan, I am not ignorant of Turk&imacr; <pb id=pb110 n=110>speech and writing.<note n=1>Probably the sections which Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r wrote were those printed in the Ilminsky edition and which bring the narrative down to B&amacr;bar&apos;s death. They seem to have been in great measure copied from the Akbar-n&amacr;ma. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r does not say if he wrote them when he was in Kabul or previously. According to Blochmann, J.A.S.B. for 1869, p. 134, one <hi>juz&hamza;</hi> = two sheets of paper. The passage is translated in Elliot, vi, 315. Though Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r does not say when he wrote the four sections, I think that his language implies that these additions were in the manuscript when he was looking at it in Kabul. Perhaps he made them when he was a student in India, and for the sake of practice in Turk&imacr;. He may have translated the sections from the Akbar-n&amacr;ma. All, I think, he did in Kabul was to put the Turk&imacr; note, stating that the sections were his. But possibly even this was done before. Elliot, vi, 315, has the words &ldquo;to complete the work,&rdquo; but these words do not occur in the MSS. that I have seen. The translation in Elliot, seems to represent Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s words as meaning that the work was complete, but that the four sections were not, like the rest, in B&amacr;bar&apos;s handwriting, and so Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r re-copied them. But it does not appear that there could be any object in his doing this. There is a valuable article in the <foreign lang=de>Zeitschrift d. Deutschen Morgenl. Gesellsch.</foreign> for 1883, p. 141, by Dr. Teufel, entitled &ldquo;<foreign lang=de>Bâbur und Abû&apos;l-fa&zdotb;l</foreign>,&rdquo; in which the fragments in Ilminsky are discussed. But the passage in the T&umacr;zuk-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; is not referred to.</note> On the 25th &Sdotb;afar I with the people of the harem visited the <hi>julg&amacr;h</hi> (plain) of Saf&imacr;d-sang, a very bright and enjoyable place. On Friday, the 26th, I enjoyed the blessing of a pilgrimage to (the tomb of) H.M. Fird&umacr;s-mak&amacr;n&imacr; (B&amacr;bar). I ordered much money and food, bread, and sweetmeats for the souls of the departed to be distributed to faqirs. Ruqayya Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Begam, daughter of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Hind&amacr;l, had not performed a pilgrimage to her father&apos;s tomb, and on that day had the honour to do so. On Thursday, 3rd Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal, I ordered them to bring my racehorses (<hi>&amacr;sp&amacr;n-i-dawanda</hi>) to the &Khbarb;iy&amacr;b&amacr;n (avenue). The princes and the Amirs raced them. A bay Arab horse, which &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the ruler of the Deccan, had sent to me, ran better than all the other horses. At this time the son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Sanjar Haz&amacr;ra and the son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; M&amacr;&shbarb;&imacr;, who were the chief leaders of the Haz&amacr;ras, came to wait on me. The Haz&amacr;ras of the village of <pb id=pb111 n=111>M&imacr;rd&amacr;d produced before me two rangs<note n=1>The text mentions a horse, but the MSS. have not this, and it seems to be a mistake.</note> that they had killed with arrows. I had never seen a rang of this size; it was larger by 20 per cent. than a large <hi>m&amacr;r&khbarb;&umacr;r</hi> (?).

<p>News came that &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor of Qandahar, had reached the parganah of &Shbarb;or,<note n=2>Apparently the Shorkot of I.G., xii, 424. In the Rechnau D&umacr;&amacr;b (Jarrett, ii, 321). It is north of Multan and in the Jhang district.</note> which is his jagir. I determined to give Kabul to him and return to Hindustan. A petition came from R&amacr;ja B&imacr;rsing-deo that he had made a prisoner of his nephew, who had been creating a disturbance and had killed many of his men. I ordered him to send him to the fort of Gwalior to be imprisoned there. The parganah of Gujr&amacr;t<note n=3>I.G.<corr>,</corr> v, 188.</note> in the Panjab Sark&amacr;r I bestowed on &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the Afghan. I promoted Ch&imacr;n Qil&imacr;j, son of Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, to the rank of 800 personal and 500 horse. On the 12th I sent for &Khbarb;usrau and ordered them to take the chains off his legs that he might walk in the &Shbarb;ahr-&amacr;r&amacr; garden. My fatherly affection would not permit me to exclude him from walking in the aforesaid garden. I transferred the fort of Attock and that neighbourhood from A&hdotb;mad Beg to &Zumlb;afar &Khbarb;&amacr;n. To Taj &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was nominated to beat back the Afghans of Banga&shbarb;, I gave 50,000 rupees. On the 14th I gave &ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Ka&rdotb;or&imacr;,<note n=4>Perhaps the &ayin;Al&imacr; D&umacr;st &Khbarb;&amacr;n of Blochmann, p. 533.</note> who was one of my revered father&apos;s old servants and was the <hi>d&amacr;ro&ghbarb;a</hi> of the Naq&amacr;ra&khbarb;&amacr;na (drum-house), the title of Naubat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and promoted him to the rank of 500 personal and 200 horse. I made R&amacr;m D&amacr;s <hi>&amacr;t&amacr;l&imacr;q</hi> to Mah&amacr; Singh, grandson of R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh, who had also been nominated to drive back the rebels of Banga&shbarb;. On Friday, the 18th, the <hi>wazn-i-qamar&imacr;</hi> (the weighing according to the lunar year) for my 40th year took place. On that day the <pb id=pb112 n=112>assembly was held when two watches of the day had passed. I gave 10,000 rupees of the money of the weighing to ten of my confidential servants to divide amongst those who deserved it and the needy. On this day a petition came from Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Qandahar, by way of Haz&amacr;ra and &Ghbarb;azn&imacr;n, in twelve days; its purport was that the ambassador of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s, who had started for the Court, had entered the Haz&amacr;ra<note n=1>The MSS. have Herat, and this is probably correct.</note> (country). The Shah had written to his own people: &ldquo;What seeker of occasion and raiser of strife has come against Qandahar without my order? Perhaps he does not know what is our connection with H.M. Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n T&imacr;m&umacr;r, and especially with Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n and his glorious descendants. If they by chance should have taken the country into their possession they should hand it to the friends and servants of my brother Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h and return to their own abodes.&rdquo; I determined to tell &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n to secure the Ghaznin road in such a way that travellers from Qandahar might reach Kabul with ease. At the same time I appointed Q&amacr;&zdotb;&imacr; N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n to the &Sdotb;ad&amacr;rat of the province of Malwah and Ujjain. The son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;dm&amacr;n Haz&amacr;ra and grandson of Qar&amacr;cha &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was one of the influential Amirs of Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n, waited on me. Qar&amacr;cha &Khbarb;&amacr;n had married a woman from the Haz&amacr;ra tribe, and this son<note n=2>That is, apparently, M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;dm&amacr;n, but perhaps the meaning is that Qar&amacr;cha had sought a wife for his son among the Haz&amacr;ras, and not that he had himself married an Haz&amacr;ra woman.</note> had been born by her. On Saturday, the 19th, R&amacr;n&amacr; &Shbarb;ankar, son of R&amacr;n&amacr; &Umacr;day Singh, was promoted to the rank of 2,500 personal and 1,000 horse. An order was given for the rank of 1,000 personal and 600 horse for R&amacr;y Manohar. The &Shbarb;inw&amacr;r&imacr; Afghans brought a mountain ram the two horns of which had become one and had become like a rang&apos;s horns. The same Afghans killed and brought <pb id=pb113 n=113>a <hi>m&amacr;r&khbarb;&umacr;r</hi> (Erskine translates this &lsquo;a serpent-eating goat&rsquo;), the like of which I had never seen or imagined. I ordered my artists to paint him. He weighed four Hindustani maunds; the length of his horns was 1&frac12; gaz.<note n=1>The MSS. have &ldquo;less than 1&frac12; gaz by &frac18; (<hi>n&imacr;m-p&amacr;o</hi>).&rdquo;</note> On Sunday, the 27th, I gave the rank of 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse to &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and the <hi>&hdotb;aw&imacr;l&imacr;</hi> (district surrounding) of Gwalior was placed in the jagir of I&ayin;tib&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n. I appointed Q&amacr;&zdotb;&imacr; &ayin;Izzatu-llah with his brothers to the Banga&shbarb; duty. At the end of the same day a petition came to me from Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n from Agra, together with a letter which Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n had written to him from Bihar. Its purport was that on the 3rd &Sdotb;afar (30th May, 1607), after the first watch, &ayin;Al&imacr; Qul&imacr; Ist&amacr;jl&umacr; had wounded Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n at Bardwan, in the province of Bengal, and that he had died when two watches of the same night had passed. The details of this matter are that the aforesaid &ayin;Al&imacr; Qul&imacr; was <hi>sufrach&imacr;</hi> (table servant) to &Shbarb;&amacr;h Ism&amacr;&ayin;&imacr;l (the 2nd), ruler of Iran; after his death he took to flight through his natural wickedness and habit of making mischief, and came to Qandahar, and having met at Multan the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n, who had been appointed to the charge of the province of Tulamba,<note n=2>Should, I think, be Tattah, i.e. Sind.</note> started with him for that province. The &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n in the field<note n=3><hi>&Ghbarb;aib&amacr;na</hi>, &lsquo;secretly.&rsquo; But the phrase merely means that the appointment was not made in the Emperor&apos;s presence.</note> placed him among the servants of the late king (Akbar), and he having performed services in that campaign was promoted to a rank in accordance with his condition, and was a long time in the service of my revered father. At the time when he (Akbar) went in prosperity to the provinces of the Deccan, and I was ordered against the R&amacr;n&amacr;, he came and became servant to me. I gave him the title of &Shbarb;&imacr;r-afgan <pb id=pb114 n=114>(tiger-throwing). When I came from Allahabad to wait on my revered father, on account of the unfriendliness that was shown me, most of my attendants and people were scattered abroad, and he also at that time chose to leave my service. After my accession, out of generosity I overlooked his offences, and gave an order for a jagir for him in the Subah of Bengal. Thence came news that it was not right to leave such mischievous persons there, and an order went to Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n to send him to Court, and if he showed any futile, seditious ideas, to punish him. The aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n had reason to know him (his character), and with the men he had present, immediately the order arrived, went hastily to Bardwan, which was his jagir. When he (&Shbarb;&imacr;r-afgan) became aware of the arrival of Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n, he went out to receive him alone with two grooms. After he arrived and entered into the midst of his army (his camp) the aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n surrounded him. When from this proceeding on the part of Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n a doubt arose in his mind, he by way of deceiving him said: &ldquo;What proceeding is this of thine?&rdquo;<note n=1>Text <hi>barga&shbarb;t</hi>, &lsquo;he turned round.&rsquo; But the MSS. have <hi>chi rawi&shbarb;-i-t&umacr;zukast</hi>, &ldquo;What kind of arrangement is this?&rdquo;</note> The aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n, keeping back his own men, joined him alone in order to explain the purport of the order to him. Seeing his opportunity he immediately drew his sword and inflicted two or three severe wounds upon him. Amba &Khbarb;&amacr;n Ka&shbarb;m&imacr;r&imacr;, who was descended from the rulers of Kashmir and was connected (by marriage?) with the aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and had a great regard for him by way of loyalty and manliness, rushed forward and struck a heavy blow on &ayin;Al&imacr; Qul&imacr;&apos;s head, and that vicious fellow inflicted a severe wound on Amba &Khbarb;&amacr;n with the point of his sword.<note n=2><hi>&Shbarb;am&shbarb;&imacr;r-i-s&imacr;&khbarb;ak&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;pointed sword, poniard&rsquo;?</note> When they saw Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n in this <pb id=pb115 n=115>state, his men attacked him (&Shbarb;&imacr;r-afgan), and cut him in pieces and sent him to hell. It is to be hoped that the place of this black-faced scoundrel will always be there. Amba &Khbarb;&amacr;n obtained martyrdom on the spot, and Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka after four watches attained the mercy of God in his quarters. What can I write of this unpleasantness? How grieved and troubled I became! Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka was to me in the place of a dear son, a kind brother, and a congenial friend. What can one do with the decrees of God? Bowing to destiny I adopted an attitude of resignation. After the departure of the late King and the death of that honoured one, no two misfortunes had happened to me like the death of the mother of Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka and his own martyrdom.

<p>On Friday, the 6th Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-&amacr;&khbarb;ir, I came to the quarters of &Khbarb;urram (&Shbarb;&amacr;h-Jah&amacr;n), which had been made in the &Umacr;rta Garden. In truth, the building is a delightful and well-proportioned one. Whereas it was the rule of my father to have himself weighed twice every year, (once) according to the solar and (once according to the) lunar year, and to have the princes weighed according to the solar year, and moreover in this year, which was the commencement of my son &Khbarb;urram&apos;s 16th lunar year, the astrologers and astronomers<note n=1>The meaning of two words being used probably is that both Hindu and Persian astrologers are referred to. Blochmann, p. 311, says that &Shbarb;&amacr;h-Jah&amacr;n&apos;s birthday was 30th Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal.</note> represented that a most important epoch according to his horoscope would occur, as the prince&apos;s health<note n=2>Lit., &ldquo;His disposition had changed from equability.&rdquo;</note> had not been good, I gave an order that they should weigh him according to the prescribed rule, against gold, silver, and other metals, which should be divided among faqirs and the needy. The whole of that day was passed in enjoyment and pleasure in the house of B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram, and many of his presents were approved.

<pb id=pb116 n=116><p>As I had experienced the excellencies of Kabul, and had eaten most of its fruits, in consequence of important considerations and the distance from the capital, on Sunday, the 4th Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-l-awwal, I gave an order that they should send out the advance camp in the direction of Hindustan. After some days I left the city, and the royal standards proceeded to the meadow of Saf&imacr;d-sang. Although the grapes were not yet fully ripe, I had often before this eaten Kabul grapes. There are many good sorts of grapes, especially the &Sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ib&imacr; and Ki&shbarb;mi&shbarb;&imacr;. The cherry also is a fruit of pleasant flavour, and one can eat more of it than of other fruits; I have in a day eaten up to 150 of them. The term <hi>&shbarb;&amacr;h-&amacr;l&umacr;</hi> means <hi>g&imacr;l&amacr;s</hi><note n=1><hi>G&imacr;l&amacr;s</hi> is a cherry in Kashmiri. See Blochmann&apos;s &Amacr;y&imacr;n, p. 616. Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l mentions in the &Amacr;y&imacr;n (Blochmann, p. 66) that Akbar called <hi>g&imacr;l&amacr;s &shbarb;&amacr;h-&amacr;l&umacr;</hi>.</note> (cherry), which are obtainable in most places of the country, but since <hi>g&imacr;l&amacr;s</hi> is like <hi>g&imacr;l&amacr;s</hi>, which is one of the names of the <hi>chalp&amacr;sa</hi> (lizard), my revered father called it <hi>&shbarb;&amacr;h-&amacr;l&umacr;</hi>. The <hi>zard-&amacr;l&umacr; paywand&imacr;</hi><note n=2><hi>Paywand&imacr;</hi> means &lsquo;to graft,&rsquo; and possibly this is the meaning here, but Steingass gives <hi>paywand&imacr;</hi> as part of the name of a plum. The text seems to be corrupt, and perhaps what Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r wrote was &ldquo;the <hi>zard-&amacr;l&umacr;</hi> resembles the <hi>&khbarb;&umacr;b&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>.&rdquo;</note> is good, and is abundant. There is especially a tree in the &Shbarb;ahr-&amacr;r&amacr; garden, that M&imacr;rz&amacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m, my uncle, planted, and is known as the M&imacr;rz&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;. The apricots of this tree are quite unlike the apricots of other trees. The peaches also are very delicious and plentiful. They had brought some peaches from Ist&amacr;lif. I had them weighed in my presence, and they came exactly in weight to 25 rupees, which is 68 current <hi>mi&sumlb;q&amacr;l</hi>. Notwithstanding the sweetness of the Kabul fruits, not one of them has, to my taste, the flavour of the mango. The parganah of Mah&amacr;ban was given as jagir to Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n. &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m, paymaster of the Ahadis, was promoted to the rank of 700 personal <pb id=pb117 n=117>and 200 horse. Mub&amacr;rak &Khbarb;&amacr;n Sarw&amacr;n&imacr; was appointed to the faujd&amacr;rship of the sarkar of &Hdotb;i&sdotb;&amacr;r. I ordered that M&imacr;rz&amacr; Far&imacr;d&umacr;n Barl&amacr;s should have a jagir in the Subah of Allahabad. On the 14th of the aforesaid month I gave Ir&amacr;dat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, brother of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the rank of 1,000 personal and 500 horse, and presenting him with a special robe of honour and a horse, bestowed on him the paymastership of the Subah of Patna and &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr;p&umacr;r. As he was my <hi>q&umacr;rbeg&imacr;</hi>, I sent by his hand a jewelled sword for my son (<hi>farzand</hi>) Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor of the aforesaid Subah. As we were going along I saw near &ayin;Al&imacr; Masjid and &Ghbarb;ar&imacr;b-&khbarb;&amacr;na a large spider of the size of a crab that had seized by the throat a snake of one and a half gaz in length and half strangled it. I delayed a minute to look on at this, and after a moment it died (the snake).

<p>I heard at Kabul that in the time of Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d of Ghazni a person of the name of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja T&amacr;b&umacr;t<note n=1>Text has Y&amacr;q&umacr;t, but it is clear from the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 25, and from I.O. MS. 181 that the name is &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja T&amacr;b&umacr;t, &lsquo;the coffin &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja.&rsquo; The author of the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma was the person sent to make the inquiry, and he gives a long account of what he saw. A surgeon was sent with him, as the &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja was said to have been martyred, and it was necessary to report on the wounds. The coffin story is mentioned in the &Amacr;y&imacr;n, i, 194. See Jarrett, ii, 409&ndash;10, but the translation is not quite accurate, I think. The punctuation of the text seems to me to be correct. It is characteristic of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r and the author of the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma that they take no notice of the colossal figures at B&amacr;miy&amacr;n, though Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l does. See Jarrett&apos;s note. It is stated in the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma that &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja T&amacr;b&umacr;t was said to have been killed in the time of Ching&imacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n. If so, the Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d mentioned by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r must be Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d &Ghbarb;or&imacr;.</note> had died in the neighbourhood of &Zdotb;u&hdotb;&amacr;k and B&amacr;miy&amacr;n, and was buried in a cave, whose limbs had not yet rotted asunder. This appeared very strange, and I sent one of my confidential record writers with a surgeon to go to the cave and, having seen the state of affairs as they were, to make a special report. He represented that half of the body which was next the ground had most <pb id=pb118 n=118>of it come asunder, and the other half which had not touched the ground remained in its own condition. The nails of the hands and feet and the hair of the head had not been shed, but the hair of the beard and moustache as far as one side of the nose had been shed. From the date that had been engraved on the door of the cave it appeared that his death had occurred before the time of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d. No one knows the exact state of the case.

<p>On Thursday, the 15th Arsl&amacr;n B&imacr;, governor of the fort of K&amacr;hmard, who was one of the servants of middle rank (?) of Wal&imacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Khbarb;&amacr;n, ruler of T&umacr;r&amacr;n, came and waited on me.<note n=1>He was appointed governor of Sehw&amacr;n (Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 27).</note> I had always heard that M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Hdotb;usain, son of &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb; M&imacr;rz&amacr;, had been killed by the &Umacr;zbegs. At this time a certain person came and presented a petition in his name, and brought a ruby of the colour of an onion, which was worth 100 rupees, as an offering. He prayed that an army might be appointed to assist him, so that he might take Badakhshan out of the &Umacr;zbegs&apos; hands. A jewelled dagger-belt was sent him, and an order given that, as the royal standards had alighted in those regions, if he really was M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Hdotb;usain, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, he should first hasten into my presence, so that having examined his petitions and claims I might send him to Badakhshan. Two hundred thousand rupees were sent for the army that had been sent with Mah&amacr; Singh and R&amacr;m D&amacr;s against the rebels of Bangash.

<p>On Thursday, the 22nd, having gone to the B&amacr;l&amacr; &Hdotb;i&sdotb;&amacr;r, I inspected the buildings in that place. As the place was not fit for me I ordered them to destroy these buildings and to prepare a palace and a royal hall of audience. On the same day they brought a peach from Ist&amacr;lif, <hi>bar&amacr;bar sar-i-buh bakal&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>, &ldquo;as big as an owl&apos;s <pb id=pb119 n=119>head&rdquo; (?).<note n=1>The MSS merely have &ldquo;of a size that I had never seen before.&rdquo; Probably the text is corrupt, and the meaning may be &ldquo;as big as a head.&rdquo; <hi>Bih</hi> is a quince, and perhaps this is what is meant here. Or the meaning may be &ldquo;equal to the biggest for size.&rdquo; Or <hi>sar</hi> may be a mistake for <hi>sih</hi> and the meaning be &ldquo;equal in size to three (ordinary peaches).&rdquo;</note> I had not seen a peach of such a size, and ordered it to be weighed, and it came to 63 Akbar&imacr; rupees, or 60 tolas. When I cut it in half its stone also came into two pieces, and its substance was sweet. I had in Kabul never eaten better fruit from any tree. On the 25th news came from Malwa that M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb; had bid farewell to this transitory world, and God Almighty had submerged him in His mercy. From the day on which he entered the service of my revered father till the time of his departure, from no act of his could dust be brought into the royal mind. He always did his duty with sincerity. The aforesaid M&imacr;rz&amacr; apparently had four sons: &Hdotb;asan and &Hdotb;usain were born of the same womb (i.e. they were twins). &Hdotb;usain fled from Burhanpur and went by sea to Iraq, and thence to Badakhshan, where they say he now is, as has been written about his message and his sending some one to me. No one knows for certain whether it is the same M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Hdotb;usain, or the people of Badakhshan have raised up this one like other false M&imacr;rz&amacr;s and given him the name of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Hdotb;usain. From the time when M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb; came from Badakhshan and had the good fortune to wait on my father until now, nearly 25 years have passed. For some time the people of Badakhshan, on account of the oppression and injury they have to undergo from the &Umacr;zbegs, have given notoriety to a Badakhshan boy, who had on his face the marks of nobility, as really the son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb; and of the race of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Sulaim&amacr;n. A large number of the scattered &Umacr;ym&amacr;qs, and the hill-people of Badakhshan, <pb id=pb120 n=120>whom they call &Ghbarb;archal (Georgians?), collected round him, and showing enmity and disputing with the &Umacr;zbegs, took some of the districts of Badakhshan out of their possession. The &Umacr;zbegs attacked that false M&imacr;rz&amacr; and captured him, and placing his head on a spear sent it round to the whole country of Badakhshan. Again the seditious people of Badakhshan quickly produced another M&imacr;rz&amacr;. Up to now several M&imacr;rz&amacr;s have been killed. It appears to me that as long as there is any trace of the people of Badakhshan they will keep up this disturbance. The third son of the M&imacr;rz&amacr; is M&imacr;rz&amacr; Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n, who excels in appearance and disposition all the other sons of the M&imacr;rz&amacr;. I begged him from his revered father, and have kept him in my own service, and having taken great pains with him reckon him as my own child. In disposition and manners he has no likeness to his brothers. After my accession I gave him the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse, and sent him to the Subah of Malwa, which was his father&apos;s place. The fourth son is Bad&imacr;&ayin;u-z-zam&amacr;n, whom he always had in attendance on himself; he obtained the rank of 1,000 personal and 500 horse.

<p>While I was at Kabul, no <hi>qamarg&amacr;h</hi> hunt had taken place. As the time for returning to Hindustan had come near, and I was very desirous of hunting red deer, I ordered them to go forward as soon as possible and surround the hill Faraq,<note n=1>I.O. MS. 181 has Qarqara mountains. There is also the reading &Khbarb;araq.</note> which is seven kos from Kabul. On Tuesday, the 4th Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-l-awwal, I went to hunt. Nearly 100 deer had come into the enclosure (qamargah). About a half of these were taken, and a very hot hunt took place. I gave 5,000 rupees in rewards to the ryots who were present at the hunt. On the same day an increase of 500 horse was ordered to the rank of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; <pb id=pb121 n=121>&ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;m&amacr;n, son of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l, so as to bring it to 2,000 personal and (2,000) horse. On Thursday, the 6th, I went to the throne-place of the late king B&amacr;bar. As I was to leave Kabul on the next day I looked on that day as a feast day, and ordered them to arrange a wine-party on the spot, and fill with wine the little reservoir they had cut in the rock. Cups were given to all the courtiers and servants who were present, and few days have passed in such enjoyment and pleasure. On Friday, the 7th, when a watch of day had passed, leaving the city auspiciously and with pleasure, a halt was made at the <hi>julg&amacr;h</hi> (meadow) of the Saf&imacr;d-sang. From the &Shbarb;ahr-&amacr;r&amacr; as far as the julgah I scattered to faqirs and poor people <hi>darb</hi> and <hi>charan</hi>, that is, half and quarter rupees.<note n=1>Blochmann, p. 31.</note> On that day, when I mounted my elephant for the purpose of leaving Kabul, the news arrived of the recovery of the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; and &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n. The news of the good health of these two chief servants of mine I took as an auspicious omen for myself. From the julgah of the Saf&imacr;d-sang, marching one kos on Tuesday, the 11th, I halted at Bikr&amacr;m. I left T&amacr;&shbarb; Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n at Kabul to take proper care of Kabul and neighbourhood until the coming of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On Tuesday, the 18th, I marched two and a half kos from the halting-place of B&umacr;t&khbarb;&amacr;k by the road D&umacr;&hamza;&amacr;ba,<note n=2>D&umacr;&hamza;&amacr;ba is mentioned as a stage by W. Finch.</note> and encamped at a spring on the bank of which there are four plane-trees. No one till now had looked to the preparation of this halting-place, and they were ignorant of its condition and suitability. It is in truth a most excellent spot, and one fit to have a building erected in it. At this halting-place another qamargah hunt took place, when about 112 deer, etc., were taken. Twenty-four rang antelope and 50 red antelope and 16 mountain goats were <pb id=pb122 n=122>taken. I had never till now seen a rang antelope alive.<note n=1>The text omits the word <hi>zinda</hi>, &lsquo;alive.&rsquo;</note> It is in truth a wonderful animal of a beautiful shape. Although the black buck of Hindustan looks very finely made, the shape and fashion and appearance of this antelope is quite a different thing. They weighed a ram and a rang; the ram came to a maund and 33 seers and the rang to two maunds and 10 seers. The rang, although of this size, ran so that ten or twelve swift dogs were worn out and seized it with a hundred thousand difficulties. The flesh of the sheep of the Barbary goat in flavour does not surpass that of the rang. In the same village kulangs (demoiselle crane) were also caught.

<p>Although &Khbarb;usrau had repeatedly done evil actions and deserved a thousand kinds of punishment, my fatherly affection did not permit me to take his life. Although in the laws of government and the ways of empire one should take notice of such disapproved deeds, I averted my eyes from his faults, and kept him in excessive comfort and ease. It became known that he was in the habit of sending men to scoundrels who did not consider consequences, and of inciting them to give trouble and attempt my life, and making them hopeful with promises. A band of these ill-fated ones of little foresight having joined together, desired to attack me in the hunts that took place in Kabul and those parts. As the grace and protection of God Almighty are the guardians and keepers of this sublime dynasty, they did not attain to their end. On the day when the halt was at the Sur&khbarb;&amacr;b, one of that band went at the risk of his life to &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Wais&imacr;, the D&imacr;w&amacr;n of my son &Khbarb;urram, and revealed that nearly 500 men at &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s instigation had conspired with Fat&hdotb;u-llah, son of &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Ab&umacr;-l-fat&hdotb;, N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n, son of &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n &ayin;Al&imacr; &Amacr;&sdotb;af-&khbarb;&amacr;n, and &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f, son of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah (N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n&apos;s father), and were awaiting an opportunity <pb id=pb123 n=123>to carry out the designs of the enemies and evil-wishers of the king. &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Wais&imacr; told this to &Khbarb;urram, and he in great perturbation immediately told me. I gave &Khbarb;urram the blessing of felicity, and prepared to get hold of the whole set of those short-sighted ones and punish them with various kinds of punishment. Again, it came to my mind, as I was on the march, and the seizure of these people would create a disturbance and confusion in the camp,<note n=1>The <hi>urd&umacr;</hi> or camp was probably not with Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r then, and he thought that if he sent to it for the capture of 500 there would be confusion. He therefore contented himself at the time with arresting the ringleaders. There is a full account of the conspiracy in the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 27, etc.</note> to order the leaders of the disturbance and mischief to be apprehended. I handed over Fat&hdotb;u-llah in confinement to certain trusty men, and ordered capital punishment for the other two wretches, with three or four of the chief among the black-faced (conspirators). I had dignified Q&amacr;sim &ayin;Al&imacr;, who was one of the servants of the late king Akbar, after my accession with the title of Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n. He always accused Fat&hdotb;u-llah of a want of loyalty, and said things about him. One day he said to Fat&hdotb;u-llah: &ldquo;At the time when &Khbarb;usrau fled and the king pursued him, you said to me: &lsquo;The Panjab should be given to &Khbarb;usrau and this quarrel cut short.&rsquo;&rdquo; Fat&hdotb;u-llah denied this, and both resorted to oaths and curses (on themselves). Ten or fifteen days had not passed after this altercation when that hypocritical wretch was arrested, and his false oath did its business.

<p>On Saturday, the 22nd Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-l-awwal, the news came of the death of the &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Jal&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n Mu&zumlb;affar Ardist&amacr;n&imacr;, who was of a family of skill and medicine and claimed to be a descendant of Galen. At all events he was an unequalled healer. His experience added to his knowledge.<note n=2>Possibly the meaning is &ldquo;his experience was greater than his skill.&rdquo;</note> As he was very handsome and well-made <pb id=pb124 n=124>in the days of his youth (<hi>s&amacr;da-r&umacr;&hamza;&imacr;ha</hi>)<note n=1>Lit., when he was smooth-faced, i.e. beardless.</note> he frequented the assemblies of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Tumlb;ahm&amacr;sp, and the king recited this hemistich about him:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;We have a pleasant physician: come, let as all be ill.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>&Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &ayin;Al&imacr;, who was his contemporary, exceeded him in skill. In short, in medical skill and auspiciousness and rectitude and purity of method and disposition he was perfect. Other physicians of the age could not compare with him. In addition to his medical skill he had many excellencies. He had perfect loyalty towards me. He built at Lahore a house of great pleasantness and purity, and repeatedly asked me to honour it (with my presence). As I was very fond of pleasing him I consented. In short, the aforesaid &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m, from his connection with me and being my physician, had great skill in the management of affairs and business of the world, so that for some time at Allahabad I made him Diwan of my establishment. On account of his great honesty he was very exacting in important business, and people were vexed at this method of proceeding. For about twenty years he had ulcerated lungs, and by his wisdom preserved in some measure his health. When he was talking he mostly coughed so much that his cheek and eyes became red, and by degrees his colour became blue. I often said to him: &ldquo;Thou art a learned physician; why dost thou not cure thy own wounds?&rdquo; He represented that wounds in the lungs were not of such a nature that they could be cured. During his illness one of his confidential servants put poison into some medicine he was in the habit of taking every day and gave it to him. When he perceived this he took remedies for it. He objected very much to be bled, although this was necessary. It happened that he was going to the privy when his cough overcame him and <pb id=pb125 n=125>opened the wounds in his lungs. So much blood poured out of his mouth and brain that he became insensible and fell, and made a fearful cry. An <hi>&amacr;ft&amacr;bach&imacr;</hi> (ewer-bearer) becoming aware of this, came into the assembly-room, and seeing him smeared with blood cried out: &ldquo;They have killed the &hdotb;ak&imacr;m.&rdquo; After examining him it was seen that there was no sign of wounds on his body, and that it was the same wound in the lungs that had begun to flow. They informed Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was the Governor of Lahore, and he, having ascertained the true state of the affair, buried him. He left no capable son.

<p>On the 24th, between the garden of Waf&amacr; and N&imacr;mlah, a hunt took place, and nearly forty red antelope were killed. A female panther (<hi>y&umacr;z</hi>) fell into our hands in this hunt. The zamindars of that place, La&ghbarb;m&amacr;n&imacr;s, &Shbarb;&amacr;l&imacr;, and Afghans, came and said that they did not remember nor had they heard from their fathers that a panther had been seen in that region for 120 years. A halt was made on the 2nd Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-l-&amacr;&khbarb;ir, at the Waf&amacr; Garden, and the assembly for the solar weighing was held. On the same day Arsl&amacr;n B&imacr;, an &Umacr;zbeg who was one of the Sardars and nobles of &ayin;Abdu-l-M&umacr;min &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and was at that time governor of the fort of K&amacr;hmard, having left his fort, had the blessing of waiting on me. As he had come from friendship and sincerity, I exalted him with a special robe of honour. He is a simple &Umacr;zbeg, and is fit to be educated and honoured. On the 4th of the month an order was given that &ayin;Izzat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor<note n=1>The I.O. MSS. do not call him governor, and the names of the animals captured differ in the MSS. from those given in the text. The latter are obviously wrong, and I have discarded them. The Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 30, has Arzana as the name of the hunting-ground. Erskine has Arzina.</note> of Jal&amacr;l&amacr;b&amacr;d, should make the hunting-ground of the Arzina plain into a qamargah (ring-hunting ground). Nearly 300 animals were captured, <pb id=pb126 n=126>namely, 35 <hi>q&umacr;ch</hi> (rams?), 25 <hi>q&umacr;&shbarb;q&imacr;</hi> (?), 90 <hi>ar&ghbarb;al&imacr;</hi> (wild sheep), 55 <hi>t&umacr;&ghbarb;l&imacr;</hi> (yaks?), 95 antelope (<hi>saf&imacr;da</hi>).

<p>As it was the middle of the day when I arrived at the hunting-place and the air was very hot, the (<hi>t&amacr;z&imacr;</hi>) Arabian dogs had been exhausted.<note n=1>Erskine has &ldquo;many of the hounds were destroyed.&rdquo; <hi>Sag&amacr;n-i-t&amacr;z&imacr;</hi> probably means greyhounds, whether bred in Arabia or elsewhere.</note> The time for running dogs is in the morning or at the end of the day. On Saturday, the 12th, the halt was at Ak&umacr;ra Saray (?). At this stage &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n,<note n=2>Blochmann, p. 377, and Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, ii, 642. He was an Ar&ghbarb;&umacr;n.</note> with a good force, came and waited on me. He was one who had been brought up by my father, the late king Akbar. In himself he is a very brave man and energetic, so much so that constantly in the time of my father he fought several single combats, and in my own reign defended the fort of Qandahar from the hosts of the ruler of Iran. It was besieged for a year before the royal army arrived to his assistance. His manners towards his soldiers are those of an Am&imacr;r (nobleman, <hi>umar&amacr;y&amacr;na</hi>), and not according to discipline (<hi>qudrat</hi>), especially towards those who have helped him in battles or are with him in campaigns. He jokes much with his servants, and this gives him an undignified appearance.<note n=3>The passage is obscure and the text is corrupt. Erskine&apos;s translation is: &ldquo;His manners towards the soldiers is frank and gallant, but not according to the rules of discipline, especially towards those who have been or are in the wars with him. He is much flattered by his servants, which gives him a light appearance.&rdquo; Evidently Erskine read <hi>udz&imacr;</hi> or <hi>n&amacr;z</hi> instead of <hi>b&amacr;z</hi> as in the text, and the MSS. support his reading. I think, however, that <hi>n&amacr;z ka&shbarb;&imacr;dan</hi> means &lsquo;to jest.&rsquo; Instead of the <hi>t&amacr; bam&amacr;ndand</hi> of text the MSS. have <hi>y&amacr; nam&amacr;yand</hi>, the meaning being those soldiers who have served him well, or are doing so. We learn from Blochmann, p. 378, that &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg was &ldquo;a frank Turk.&rdquo;</note> I have repeatedly warned him about this, but as it is in his nature my remonstrances have had no effect.

<p>On Monday, the 14th, I promoted H&amacr;&shbarb;im &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who is one of the household, born ones of our dynasty, to <pb id=pb127 n=127>the rank of 3,000 with 2,000 horse, and I made him governor of the province of Orissa. On the same day news came that Bad&imacr;&ayin;u-z-zam&amacr;n, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, who was in the province of Malwa, through folly and youth had started with a body of rebels to go to the province of the R&amacr;n&amacr; and join him. &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor of that place, being informed of this event went after him, and having made him prisoner on the way, slew several of the wretches who had joined with him. An order was given that Ihtim&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n should start from Agra and bring the M&imacr;rz&amacr; to the court. On the 25th of the aforesaid month news came that Im&amacr;m Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, nephew of Wal&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, ruler of M&amacr;war&amacr;&hamza;a-n-nahr, had killed him who was called M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Hdotb;usain, who had been reported to be the son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;. In truth, the killing of the sons of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb; is like the killing of the demons, as they say that from every drop of their blood demons are produced. In the station of Dhaka, &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the Afghan, whom when I left I had placed at Peshawar to guard the Khaibar Pass, came and waited on me. He had made no default in preserving and guarding the road. &Zumlb;afar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Zain &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka, had been appointed to move on the Dal&amacr;z&amacr;k Afghans and the tribe of Khatur, who had perpetrated all kinds of misdeeds in the neighbourhood of Attock and the Beas and that vicinity. After performing that service and the conquest of those rebels, who numbered about 100,000 houses, and sending them off towards Lahore, he came and waited upon me at the same halting-place, and it was evident that he had performed that service as it ought to have been done. As the month of Rajab, corresponding with the Il&amacr;h&imacr; month of &Amacr;b&amacr;n, had arrived,<note n=1>The peculiarity of this year was that the lunar month and the solar month of Akbar&apos;s birth, viz. Rajab and &Amacr;b&amacr;n, coincided, so that there was a double celebration.</note> and it was known that this <pb id=pb128 n=128>was one of the months fixed for the lunar weighing (<hi>wazn-i-qamar&imacr;</hi>) of my father, I determined that the value of all the articles which he used to order for his own weighing in the solar and lunar years should be estimated, and that what this came to should be sent to the large cities for the repose of the soul of that enlightened one, and be divided amongst the necessitous and the faqirs. The total came to 100,000 rupees, equal to 300 Ir&amacr;q tum&amacr;ns, and 300,000 of the currency of the people of M&amacr;war&amacr;&hamza;a-n-nahr.

<p>Trustworthy men divided that sum among the twelve chief cities, such as Agra, Delhi, Lahore, Gujarat (Ahmadabad), etc. On Thursday, the 3rd Rajab, I favoured with the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n-jah&amacr;n my son (<hi>farzand</hi>) &Sdotb;al&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who is not less to me than my own sons, and ordered that they should in all firmans and orders write of him as &Khbarb;&amacr;n-jah&amacr;n. A special robe of honour and a jewelled sword were also given him. Also, having entitled &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n-daur&amacr;n, I presented him with a jewelled waist-dagger, a male elephant, and a special horse. The whole of the sarkars of T&imacr;rah, Kabul, Bangash, and the province of Saw&amacr;d (Swat) Bajaur, with the (task of) beating back the Afghans of those regions, and a jagir and the faujd&amacr;rship were confirmed to him. He took leave from B&amacr;b&amacr; &Hdotb;asan Abd&amacr;l. I also ordered R&amacr;m D&amacr;s Kachhw&amacr;ha to receive a jagir in this province and to be enrolled among the auxiliaries of this Subah. I conferred on Ki&shbarb;an Chand, son of the Mota (fat) R&amacr;ja, the rank of 1,000 personal and 500 horse. A firman was written to Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n (Sayyid Far&imacr;d), governor of Gujarat, that as the good conduct and excellence and abstemiousness of the son of Miy&amacr;n Waj&imacr;hu-d-d&imacr;n<note n=1>Waj&imacr;hu-d-d&imacr;n was a famous Gujarat saint. He died in 998.</note> had been reported to me, he should hand over to him from me a sum of money, and that he should write and send me some of <pb id=pb129 n=129>the names of God which had been tested. If the grace of God should be with me I would continually repeat<note n=1>The word used by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, and which has been translated &lsquo;repeat continually,&rsquo; is <hi>mud&amacr;wamat</hi>, and Erskine understood it to mean that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r hoped to prolong his life by this exercise.</note> them. Before this I had given leave to Zafar &Khbarb;&amacr;n to go to B&amacr;b&amacr; &Hdotb;asan Abd&amacr;l to collect together game for sport. He had made a <hi>&shbarb;&amacr;&khbarb;band</hi> (literally a tying together of horns or branches). Twenty-seven red deer and 68 white ones came into the <hi>&shbarb;&amacr;&khbarb;band</hi>. I myself struck with arrows 29 antelope, and Parw&imacr;z and &Khbarb;urram also killed some others with arrows. Afterwards orders were given to the servants and courtiers to shoot. &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n was the best shot, and in every case of his striking an antelope the arrow penetrated through and through.<note n=2><hi>Har ah&umacr;&hamza;&imacr; kih zad bar sar-i-t&imacr;r raft.</hi> The literal rendering apparently is: &ldquo;whenever an antelope was struck by him the arrow entered up to its (the arrow&apos;s) head.&rdquo; Perhaps the meaning simply is every arrow (or bullet) that he shot went home.</note> Again, on the 14th of the month of Rajab, Zafar &Khbarb;&amacr;n had arranged a qamargah at R&amacr;walpind&imacr;. I struck with an arrow a red deer at a long distance, and was highly delighted at the arrow striking him and his falling down. Thirty-four red deer and 35 <hi>qar&amacr;-q&umacr;yr&umacr;&ghbarb;</hi> (black-tailed) antelope, which in the Hindi language they call <hi>chik&amacr;ra</hi>, and two pigs were also killed. On the 21st another qamargah had been arranged within three kos of the fort of Rohtas by the efforts and exertions of Hil&amacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n. I had taken with me to this hunt those who were screened by the curtains of honour (the members of the zan&amacr;nah). The hunt was a good one and came off with great <hi>éclat</hi>. Two hundred red and white antelope were killed. Passing on from Rohtas, the hills of which contain these antelope, there are in no place in the whole of Hindustan, with the exception of Girjh&amacr;k and Nandanah, red deer of this description. I ordered them <pb id=pb130 n=130>to catch and keep some of them alive, in order that possibly some of them might reach Hindustan for breeding purposes. On the 25th another hunt took place in the neighbourhood of Rohtas. In this hunt also my sisters and the other ladies were with me, and nearly 100 red deer were killed. It was told me that &Shbarb;ams &Khbarb;&amacr;n, uncle of Jal&amacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n<note n=1>Jal&amacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n was a grandson of Sult&amacr;n &Amacr;dam (Blochmann, pp. 455 and 486).</note> Gakkhar who was in that neighbourhood, notwithstanding his great age took much delight in hunting, such that young men had not so much enjoyment in it. When I heard that he was well-disposed towards faqirs and dervishes I went to his house, and his disposition and manners pleased me. I bestowed on him 2,000 rupees, and the same sum on his wives and children, with five other villages with large receipts by way of livelihood for them, that they might pass their days in comfort and contentment. On the 6th &Shbarb;a&ayin;ban, at the halting-place of Chand&amacr;lah, the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; came and waited on me. I was greatly pleased at obtaining his society again, for all the physicians, Hindu and Musulman, had made up their minds that he would die. Almighty God in His grace and mercy granted him the honour of recovery, in order that it might be known to such as do not recognize His will that for every difficult ill, which those who look on the outside of causes only may have given up as hopeless, there is One who is powerful to provide a cure and remedy out of His own kindness and compassion. On the same day R&amacr;y R&amacr;y Singh,<note n=2>See <hi>infra</hi> for another notice of him in the chapter on Gujrat.</note> one of the most considerable of the Rajput Amirs, ashamed on account of the fault he had committed in the matter of &Khbarb;usrau, and who was living at his home, came, and under the patronage of the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; obtained the good <pb id=pb131 n=131>fortune of waiting on me; his offences were pardoned. At the time that I left Agra in pursuit of &Khbarb;usrau I had in full confidence left him in charge of Agra, so that when the ladies (<hi>ma&hdotb;alh&amacr;</hi>)<note n=1>One of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s wives was a daughter of R&amacr;y R&amacr;y Singh (of Bikanir). See Blochmann, p. 310.</note> should be sent for he might come with them. After the ladies were sent for he went for two or three stages with them, and in the village of Mathura, on merely hearing foolish tales, separated from them, and went to his native place (Bikanir). He thought that as a commotion had arisen he would see where the right road was. The merciful God, who cherishes His servants, in a short time having arranged that affair broke the rope of the alliance of those rebels, and this betrayal of his salt remained a burden on his neck. In order to please the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; I ordered the rank which he formerly held to be confirmed to him, and his jagir to remain as it was. I promoted Sulaim&amacr;n Beg, who was one of my attendants from the time when I was prince, to the title of Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On Monday, the 12th, a halt was made at the garden of Dil-&amacr;m&imacr;z, which is on the bank of the river Ravi. I waited on my mother in this garden. M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;, who had done approved service in command of the army at Qandahar, waited on me, and I bestowed great favour on him.

<p>On Tuesday, the 13th, I auspiciously entered Lahore. The next day M&imacr;r &Khbarb;al&imacr;lu-llah, son of &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad, M&imacr;rm&imacr;r&amacr;n, who was of the descendants of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Ni&ayin;matu-llah Wal&imacr;, paid his respects.<note n=2>See Rieu, Cat. ii, p. 634.</note> In the reign of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Tumlb;ahm&amacr;sp there was no family of such greatness in the whole country, for the sister of the Shah, by name J&amacr;nish Begam, was in the house of (married to) M&imacr;r Ni&ayin;matu-llah, the father of the M&imacr;rm&imacr;r&amacr;n. <pb id=pb132 n=132>A daughter who was born to them, the Shah gave in marriage to his own son Isma&ayin;&imacr;l M&imacr;rz&amacr;, and making the sons of that M&imacr;rm&imacr;r&amacr;n sons-in-law, gave his younger daughter to his eldest son, who had the same name as his grandfather, and connected (in marriage) the daughter of Isma&ayin;&imacr;l M&imacr;rz&amacr;, who was born of the niece of the Shah, to another son, M&imacr;r &Khbarb;al&imacr;lu-llah. After the death of the Shah, by degrees the family went to decay, until in the reign of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s they became all at once extirpated, and they lost the property and effects that they had and could no longer remain in their own place. M&imacr;r &Khbarb;al&imacr;lu-llah came to wait upon me. As he had undergone trouble on the road, and the signs of sincerity were apparent from his circumstances, having made him a sharer of my unstinted favours I gave him 12,000 rupees in cash, and promoted him to the rank of 1,000 personal and 200 horse, and gave an order for a jagir.

<p>An order was given to the civil department (<hi>d&imacr;w&amacr;niy&amacr;n</hi>) to confer the rank of 8,000 personal and 5,000 horse on my son &Khbarb;urram, and to provide a jagir for him in the neighbourhood of Ujjain, and to assign the Sarkar of &Hdotb;i&sdotb;&amacr;r F&imacr;r&umacr;za to him. On Thursday, the 22nd, on the invitation of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, I went with my ladies to his house and passed the night there. The next day he presented before me his own offerings, of the value of ten lacs of rupees, in jewels and jewelled things, robes, elephants, and horses. Some single rubies and jacinths and some pearls, also silk cloths with some pieces of porcelain from China and Tartary, were accepted, and I made a present of the rest to him. Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n from Gujarat sent by way of offering a ring made of a single ruby of good colour, substance, and water, the stone, the socket, and the ring being all of one piece. They weighed 1&frac12; tanks and one surkh, which is equal to one misqal and 15 surkh. This was sent to me and much approved. Till that day no one had ever heard of <pb id=pb133 n=133>such a ring having come to the hands of any sovereign. A single ruby weighing six surkhs or two tanks and 15 surkhs,<note n=1>There is evidently something wrong in the text, for a ruby weighing 6 surkhs could not weigh 2 tanks and 15 surkhs. I.O. MS. 181 has <hi>barja</hi> instead of <hi>sur&khbarb;</hi>, but I do not know what this means. Perhaps <hi>&shbarb;a&shbarb;-g&umacr;&shbarb;a</hi>, &lsquo;hexagonal,&rsquo; was intended. This view is confirmed by the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 31, which has <hi>&shbarb;a&shbarb; pahl&umacr;</hi>, &lsquo;six-sided.&rsquo; Erskine&apos;s MS. also had &lsquo;six-sided,&rsquo; and he translates &ldquo;a six-sided ruby which weighed two <hi>tangs</hi> fifteen <hi>surkhs</hi>.&rdquo; I.O. MS. 305 has <hi>&shbarb;a&shbarb; p&amacr;rcha</hi>, and it is evident that this word, as also the <hi>barja</hi> of No. 181, is the <hi>p&amacr;rche</hi> of Steingass, which means a segment or facet.</note> and of which the value was stated to be £25,000, was also sent. The ring was valued at the same figure.

<p>On the same day the envoy of the Sharif of Mecca came to wait on me with a letter and the curtain of the door of the Ka&ayin;bah. He showed great friendship towards me. The said envoy had bestowed on him 500,000 <hi>d&amacr;m</hi>, equal to 7,000 or 8,000 rupees, and I resolved to send the Sharif the equivalent of 100,000 rupees of the precious things of Hindustan. On Thursday, the 10th of the month, a piece of the Subah of Multan was added to the jagir of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;, though the whole of the province of Thattah had been given to him in jagir. He was also promoted to the rank of 5,000 personalty and 5,000 horse. The government of Qandahar and the protection of that region, which is the frontier of Hindustan, were assigned to his excellent administration. Conferring on him a robe of honour and a jewelled sword I gave him his leave. In fine, M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; possessed perfection,<note n=2>This remark about M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;, and also the quotation, do not occur in the two I.O. MSS.</note> and he made also good verses. He used Waq&amacr;r&imacr; as his <hi>ta&khbarb;allu&sdotb;</hi>, or poetic name (R&umacr;z-i-r&umacr;shan, Bhopal 1297, p. 455; also Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, vol. iii, p. 347). This is one of his couplets:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;If my weeping should cause her to smile, what wonder?
    <l>Though the cloud weep, the cheek of the rose-bush smiles.&rdquo;
</lg>


<pb id=pb134 n=134><p>On the 15th the offering of the Khankhanan was presented to me: 40 elephants, some jewelled and decorated vessels, some Persian robes, and cloth that they make in the Deccan and those parts, had been sent by him, altogether of the value of 150,000 rupees. M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam and most of the office-holders of that Subah had also sent good offerings. Some of the elephants were approved. News of the death of R&amacr;y Durg&amacr;,<note n=1>Blochmann, p. 417.</note> who was one of those who had been brought up by my revered father, arrived on the 18th of the month. He had been in attendance for forty years and more in the position of an Am&imacr;r on my revered father, until, by degrees, he had risen in rank to 4,000. Before he obtained the good fortune of waiting on my father he was one of the trusted servants of R&amacr;n&amacr; &Umacr;day Singh. He died on the 29th. He was a good military man. Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Shbarb;&amacr;h, the Afghan, whose disposition was turbulent and mischievous, passed his time in the service of &Khbarb;usrau, and had his complete intimacy, so much so that this rebel was the cause of the running away of that unfortunate one. After the defeat and capture of &Khbarb;usrau he went off alone(?)<note n=2><hi>Bayakt&amacr;</hi>, but the I.O. MSS have <hi>batagp&amacr;y</hi>, &lsquo;rapidly.&rsquo;</note> into the skirts of the hills of &Khbarb;i&zdotb;r&amacr;b&amacr;d and that region. At last he was made prisoner by M&imacr;r Mu&ghbarb;al, the <hi>karor&imacr;</hi> of that place. As he had been the cause of the destruction and ruin of such a son, I ordered them to shoot him with arrows on the plain of Lahore. The aforesaid <corr sic=karori>karor&imacr;</corr> was promoted to higher rank, and was dignified with a grand dress of honour. On the 29th &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the Afghan, who was one of my old servants, died. One might say that he took his own life, because he was continually drinking wine, to the extent that in every watch he used to drink four brimming cups of arrack of double strength. He had broken the fast of the Rama&zdotb;&amacr;n of the past year, <pb id=pb135 n=135>and took it into his head this year that he would fast in the month of Sha&ayin;b&amacr;n on account of his having broken the fast of Rama&zdotb;&amacr;n, and would fast for two months together. In abandoning his usual custom, which is a second nature, he became weak and his appetite left him, and becoming very weak he passed away in his 57th year. Patronising his children and brothers according to their circumstances, I bestowed on them a portion of his rank and jagir.

<p>On the 1st of the month of &Shbarb;aww&amacr;l I went to visit Maul&amacr;n&amacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad Am&imacr;n, who was one of the disciples of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d Kam&amacr;ngar (the bow-maker). The &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d<note n=1>Properly Zainu-d-d&imacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d. See the story in Baday&umacr;n&imacr;, Ranking, p. 589; also Akbar-n&amacr;ma translation, i, 611, and Blochmann, p. 539 and note.</note> mentioned was one of the great men of his age, and H.M. Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n had entire reliance on him, so much so that he once poured water on his hands. The aforesaid Maul&amacr;n&amacr; is a man of good disposition, and is free, notwithstanding the attachments and accidents (of the world), a faqir in manner and ways, and acquainted with brokenness of spirit. His company pleased me exceedingly. I explained to him some of the griefs that had entangled themselves in my mind and heard from him good advice and agreeable words, and found myself greatly consoled at heart. Having presented him with 1,000 <hi>b&imacr;gh&amacr;</hi> and 1,000 rupees in cash by way of maintenance, I took leave. One watch of day had passed on Sunday when I left Lahore on my way to the capital of Agra. Having made Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n governor, M&imacr;r Qaw&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n diwan, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Y&umacr;suf bakhshi, and Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n kotwal, and presented each according to his circumstances with dresses of honour, I turned towards my desired way. On the 25th, having passed over the river at Sul&tumlb;anp&umacr;r, I proceeded two kos and halted at Nakodar. My revered father had given <pb id=pb136 n=136>&Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l<note n=1>I do not know if this is the author. There appears to be no mention of the construction in the Akbar-n&amacr;ma. Nakodar is in the Jalandhar district (I.G., x, 180, and Jarrett, ii. 317). Perhaps the two tombs at Nakodar mentioned in I.G. as of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s time are those of Muq&imacr;m the Waz&imacr;ru-l-mulk and his wife. See T&umacr;zuk, pp. 6 and 64.</note> gold of the weight of 20,000 rupees to build an embankment between these two parganahs and prepare a waterfall, and in truth I found a halting-place exceedingly pleasant and fresh. I ordered Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk, the jagirdar of Nakodar, to erect a building and prepare a garden on one side of this embankment, so that wayfarers seeing it might be pleased. On Saturday, 10th &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da, Waz&imacr;ru-l-mulk, who before my ascension had the good fortune to serve me, and was Diwan of my establishment, died of diarrh&oelig;a. At the end of his life a son of evil fortune (lit footsteps) had been born in his house, who in the space of forty days ruined<note n=2><hi>&Khbarb;wurd</hi>, lit. &lsquo;devoured.&rsquo; Apparently he refers to the fact of the birth as a misfortune. I.O. MS. 181 has <hi>sar-i-m&amacr;dar u pidar r&amacr; &khbarb;wurd</hi>, and the A.S. 124 has <hi>&shbarb;&imacr;r-i-m&amacr;dar u pidar-i-&khbarb;&umacr;d</hi>, &lsquo;the milk of his own mother and father&rsquo;!</note> (Erskine has &lsquo;ate&rsquo;) both his father and mother, and who himself died when he was two or three years old. It occurred to me that the house of Waz&imacr;ru-l-mulk must not all at once be ruined, and patronising Man&sdotb;&umacr;r, his brother&apos;s son, I gave him rank. Indeed,<note n=3>This is given as a quotation in No. 181.</note> he showed no love to me (the scent of love did not come from him). On Monday, the 14th, I heard on the road that between Panipat and Karnal there were two tigers that were giving much trouble to wayfarers. I collected the elephants and sent them off. When I arrived at their (the tigers&apos;) place I mounted a female elephant, and ordered them to place the elephants round them after the manner of a qamargah (enclosure), and by the favour of Allah killed both with a gun, and thus got rid of the raging tigers that had closed the road to the servants of God. On Thursday, <pb id=pb137 n=137>the 18th,<note n=1>This should be the 17th if Monday was the 14th.</note> I halted at Delhi and alighted at the residence which Sal&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the Afghan, had made in the days of his rule in the middle of the river Jumna and called Sal&imacr;mga&ddotb;h. My revered father had given the place to Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was originally an inhabitant of Delhi. The aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n had built on the margin of the river a terrace of stone excessively pleasant and bright. Below that building<note n=2>The MSS. seem to have <hi>muta&sdotb;&sdotb;il-i-mab-i-chaukand&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;in shape like a chaukand&imacr;(?).&rsquo; It was from the roof of this building that Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n fell.</note> near the water there was made a square <hi>chaukand&imacr;</hi> with glazed tiles by the order of H.M. Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n, and there are few places with such air. In the days when the late king Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n honoured Delhi with his presence, he often sat there with his intimates, and associated with the members of his assemblies. I passed four days in that place, and with my courtiers and intimates enjoyed myself with wine parties. Mu&ayin;a&zumlb;&zumlb;am &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was governor of Delhi, presented offerings. The jagirdars and citizens also made offerings and presents, each according to his circumstances. I was desirous to employ some days in a qamargah hunt in the parganah of P&amacr;lam, which is one of the places near the aforesaid city and one of the fixed hunting-grounds. As it was represented to me that the (fortunate) hour for approaching Agra had come very near, and another proper hour was not to be obtained at all near that time, I gave up the intention, and embarking on board a boat went on by water. On the 20th of the month of &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da four boys and three girls, children of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, whom he had not mentioned to my father, were brought. I placed the boys among my confidential servants, and made over the girls to the attendants of the ladies of the harem in order that they might look after them. On the 21st of the same month R&amacr;j&amacr; M&amacr;n Singh came and waited on me <pb id=pb138 n=138>from the fort of Rohtas, which is in the province of Patna and Behar, after orders had been sent to him six or seven times. He also, like &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, is one of the hypocrites and old wolves of this State. What they have done to me, and what has happened to them from me, God the knower of secrets knows; possibly no one could mention such another case(?). The aforesaid Raja produced as offerings 100 elephants, male and female, not one of which was fit to be included among my private elephants. As he was one of those who had been favoured by my father, I did not parade his offences before his face, but with royal condescension promoted him.

<p>On this day they brought a talking <hi>jal</hi> (lark) which distinctly said &ldquo;Miy&amacr;n &Tumlb;&umacr;&tumlb;&imacr;.&rdquo; It was very strange and wonderful. In Turki they call this bird <hi>turghai</hi>.<note n=1><hi>Tur&ghbarb;ai</hi> or <hi>tur&ghbarb;ei</hi> is a thrush according to Vambéry, and was the name of Timur&apos;s father. Perhaps the bird was the large <hi>main&amacr;</hi>, the Bh&imacr;mr&amacr;j or Bhringraj(?) of the &Amacr;y&imacr;n, Jarrett, ii, p. 125 and note. In Scully&apos;s Glossary, <hi>turghai</hi> is said to be the lark. The text arranges the words differently from the MSS. They have <hi>mu&shbarb;a&khbarb;&khbarb;a&sdotb; Miy&amacr;n &Tumlb;&umacr;&tumlb;&imacr; gufta</hi>, and Erskine translates &lsquo;which said clearly Miy&amacr;n &Tumlb;u&tumlb;&imacr;.&rsquo; But possibly Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r meant that it spoke clearly like a parrot.</note>




<div1 id=yr3>
<head>The Third New Year&apos;s Feast from my Accession.</head>


<p>On Thursday, the 2nd &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja, corresponding with the 1st Farward&imacr;n (19th March, 1608), the Sun, which enlightens and heats the world with its splendour, changed from the constellation of Pisces to the joyful mansion of Aries, the abode of pleasure and rejoicing. It gave the world fresh brightness, and being aided by the Spring clothed those who had been plundered by the cold season, and tyrannised over by the Autumn, with the robes of honour of the New Year and the garments of emerald green, and gave them compensation and recuperation.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Again to Not-Being came the world&apos;s lord&apos;s order,
    <l>&lsquo;Restore what thou hast devoured.&rsquo;&rdquo;
</lg>


<pb id=pb139 n=139><p>The feast of the New Year was held in the village of Rankatta,<note n=1>Blochmann, p. 332. Sikandra, Akbar&apos;s tomb, lies half-way between Rankattah and Agra. Tiefenthaler, i, 206, gives the name as Runcta, and says it is a famous place, as R&amacr;m there took the figure of Paras R&amacr;m. Jarrett, ii, 180, has Rangtah, and it is there described as a village on the Jumna, near the city, and a much frequented place of worship. The Agra volume of the N.W.P. Gazetteer, p. 764, spells it Runkutta, and says it is 9 miles north-west of Agra. See also Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, ii, 407, art. &Sdotb;a&ayin;id &Khbarb;&amacr;n, where mention is made of Rankatta and Hil&amacr;l&amacr;b&amacr;d, and Blochmann, p. 332.</note> which is five kos off (from Agra), and at the time of transit (of the sun) I seated myself on the throne with glory and gladness. The nobles and courtiers and all the servants came forward with their congratulations. In the same assembly I bestowed on &Khbarb;&amacr;njah&amacr;n the rank of 5,000 personal and horse. I selected &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n for the post of bakhshi. Dismissing Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n from the Viziership of the province of Bengal, I sent in his place Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan &Shbarb;ih&amacr;b&khbarb;&amacr;n&imacr;; and N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Qul&imacr; became kotwal of Agra. As the glorious mausoleum of the late king Akbar was on the road, it entered my mind that if in passing by I should have the good fortune of a pilgrimage to it, it might occur to those who were short-sighted that I visited it because it was the place where my road crossed. I accordingly had determined that this time I would enter Agra, and after that would go on foot on this pilgrimage to the shrine, which is two and a half kos off, in the same way that the &Hdotb;a&zdotb;rat (my father), on account of my birth, had gone from Agra to Ajmir. Would that I might also traverse the same on my head! When two watches of day had passed of Saturday, the 5th<note n=2>If Thursday was the 2nd, Saturday would be the 4th. He went first to Agra from Rangta, apparently.</note> of the month, at an auspicious hour, I returned towards Agra, and scattering with two hands 5000 rupees in small coins on the way, entered the august palace which was inside the fort. On this day R&amacr;ja B&imacr;r Singh Deo brought a white cheeta to show me. Although other sorts <pb id=pb140 n=140>of creatures, both birds and beasts, have white varieties, which they call <hi>&tumlb;&umacr;y&ghbarb;&amacr;n</hi>,<note n=1><hi>&Tumlb;&umacr;y&ghbarb;un</hi> or <hi>&tumlb;&umacr;y&ghbarb;un</hi> is given in Zenker as Turk&imacr; for the white falcon. See Elliot, vi, 317.</note> I had never seen a white cheeta. Its spots, which are (usually) black, were of a blue colour, and the whiteness of the body was also inclined to bluishness. Of the albino animals that I have seen there are falcons, sparrow-hawks, hawks (<hi>&shbarb;ikara</hi>) that they call <hi>b&imacr;g&umacr;</hi><note n=2><hi>B&imacr;&ghbarb;&umacr;</hi>, which is given in Zenker, is Turk&imacr;. The text has <hi>l&imacr;f&umacr;</hi>. The I.O. MSS. have <hi>b&imacr;g&umacr;</hi>.</note> in the Persian language, sparrows, crows, partridges, florican, <hi>podna</hi><note n=3>Should be <hi>b&umacr;dana</hi>, &lsquo;quail.&rsquo;</note> (<hi>Sylvia olivacea</hi>), and peacocks. Many hawks in aviaries are albinos. I have also seen white flying mice (flying squirrels) and some albinos among the black antelope, which is a species found only in Hindustan. Among the <hi>chik&amacr;ra</hi> (gazelle), which they call <hi>saf&imacr;da</hi> in Persia, I have frequently seen albinos. At this time Ratan, son of Bhoj-h&amacr;ra, who is one of the chief Rajput nobles, came to the camp and waited on me, bringing three elephants as an offering. One of these was much approved, and they valued it in the office at 15,000 rupees. It was entered among my private elephants, and I gave it the name of Ratangaj. The value of elephants of the former great Rajas of India was not more than 25,000 rupees, but they have now become very dear. I dignified Ratan with the title of Sarbuland R&amacr;y. I promoted M&imacr;r&amacr;n &Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n to the rank of 5,000 personal and 1,500 horse and Mu&ayin;a&zumlb;&zumlb;am &Khbarb;&amacr;n to 4,000 personal and 2,000 horse. &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n was promoted to 3,000 and 500 horse. Mu&zumlb;affar &Khbarb;&amacr;n and Bh&amacr;o Singh each obtained the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse. Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan diwan had 1,000 and 500 horse. I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah that of 1,000 personal and 250 horse. On the 25th R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh, the maternal uncle of my son &Khbarb;urram, came and paid his respects to me. He brought with him Shy&amacr;m, the cousin of the turbulent <pb id=pb141 n=141>Umr&amacr;. In truth he possesses some skill and understands well how to ride elephants. R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh had brought with him a poet who wrote verse in the Hindi tongue. He laid before me a poem in my praise to the purport that if the Sun had a son it would be always day and never would be night, because after his setting that son would sit in his place and keep the world in light. Praise and thanksgiving to God that God gave your father such a son that after his death men should not wear mourning which is like the night. The Sun had envy on this account, saying, &ldquo;Would I might also have a son who, taking my place, should not allow night to approach the world, for from the light of your rising and the illumination of your justice, notwithstanding such a misfortune, the spheres are so bright that one might say &lsquo;night had neither name nor sign.&rsquo;&rdquo; Few Hindi verses of such freshness of purport have ever reached my ear. As a reward for this eulogy I gave him an elephant. The Rajputs call a poet Ch&amacr;ran (name of a caste who are many of them poets). One of the poets of the age has turned<note n=1>Apparently this is a translation from the Hindi.</note> these sentiments into (Persian) verse&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;If the world-illuminator had a son,
    <l>There would be no night; it would be always day;
    <l>For when his gold-crowned head was hidden
    <l>His son would display his tiara peak.
    <l>Thanks that after such a father
    <l>Such a son sits in his place.
    <l>For from the demise of that king
    <l>No one made black robes for mourning.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>On Thursday, the 8th Mu&hdotb;arram, 1017<note n=2>Text wrongly has 1014.</note> (24th April, 1608), Jal&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n Mas&ayin;&umacr;d, who held the rank of 400 personal and was not wanting in bravery, and who in several battles had done great deeds, died at about the age of 50 or 60 years of diarrh&oelig;a. He was an opium-eater, and used to eat opium after breaking it in pieces, like <pb id=pb142 n=142>cheese, and it is notorious that he frequently ate opium from the hand of his own mother. When his disease became violent and there was a prospect of his death, his mother from excessive love for him ate more opium than was right out of that which she used to give her son, and two or three hours after his death she also died. I have never heard of such affection on the part of a mother for her son. It is the custom among the Hindus that after the death of their husbands women burn themselves, whether from love, or to save the honour of their fathers, or from being ashamed before their sons-in-law, but nothing like this was ever manifested on the part of mothers, Musulman or Hindu. On the 15th of the same month I presented my best horse by way of favour to R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh. &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s had sent this horse with some other horses and fitting gifts by Min&umacr;chihr, one of his confidential slaves, to the late king Akbar. From being presented with this horse the Raja was so delighted that if I had given him a kingdom I do not think he would have shown such joy. At the time they brought the horse it was three or four years old. It grew up in Hindustan. The whole of the servants of the Court, Moghul and Rajput together, represented that no horse like this had ever come from Iraq to Hindustan. When my revered father gave the province of Khandesh and the Subah of the Deccan to my brother D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, and was returning to Agra, he by way of kindness told D&amacr;niy&amacr;l to ask of him whatever he desired. Seizing the opportunity, he asked for this horse, and he accordingly gave it to him. On Tuesday, the 20th, a report came from Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n with the news of the death of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor of the Subah of Bengal, who was my special slave. On account of his natural excellence and innate merit he had been enrolled in the list of the great Amirs. I was much grieved at his death. I bestowed the rule of Bengal and the tutorship <pb id=pb143 n=143>to Prince Jah&amacr;nd&amacr;r on my <hi>farzand</hi><note n=1>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r calls Isl&amacr;m <hi>farzand</hi> because he was the son of his foster-brother. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; means &lsquo;slave of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r.&rsquo;</note> Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and in his place gave the government of the Subah of Behar to Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n (son of Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l). The son of &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &ayin;Al&imacr;, whom I had sent on some duties to Burhanpur, came and brought with him some Karnatic jugglers who had no rivals or equals; for instance, one of them played with ten balls, each of which was equal to an orange and one to a citron, and one to a <hi>sur&khbarb;</hi>,<note n=2>The seed of <hi>Abrus precatorius</hi>.</note> in such a way that notwithstanding some were small and some large he never missed one, and did so many kinds of tricks that one&apos;s wits became bewildered. At the same time a dervish from Ceylon came and brought a strange animal called a <hi>deonak</hi><note n=3>Or <hi>devtaq</hi>. Qu. <hi>devan&amacr;yak</hi>? The MSS. have <hi>y&umacr;nk</hi> and <hi>wab&umacr;nk</hi>. The text is corrupt and has converted the word for &lsquo;bat&rsquo; into a &lsquo;lamb.&rsquo;</note> (or <hi>devang</hi>). Its face was exactly like a large bat, and the whole shape was like that of a monkey, but it had no tail. Its movements were like those of the black tailless monkey which they call <hi>ban m&amacr;nu&shbarb;</hi> (jungle man) in the Hindi language. Its body was like that of a young monkey two or three months old. It had been with the dervish for five years.<note n=4>The text is corrupt.</note> It appeared that the animal would never grow larger. Its food is milk and it also eats plantains. As the creature appeared very strange, I ordered the artists to take a likeness of it in various kinds of movement. It looked very ugly.

<p>On the same day M&imacr;rz&amacr; Far&imacr;d&umacr;n Barl&amacr;s was promoted to the rank of 1,500 personal and 1,300 horse. An order was given that P&amacr;yanda<note n=5>Blochmann, p. 387.</note> &Khbarb;&amacr;n Moghul, as he had reached old age after exerting himself as a soldier, should receive a jagir equal to 2,000 personal. Ilf &Khbarb;&amacr;n was promoted to the rank of 700 personal and 500 horse. The rank of Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n<corr>,</corr> my son (<hi>farzand</hi>), <pb id=pb144 n=144>the governor of the Subah of Bengal, was fixed at 4,000 personal and 3,000 horse. The guardianship of the fort of Rohtas was bestowed on Ki&shbarb;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka. Ihtim&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n was raised to the rank of 1,000 personal and 300 horse, and made <hi>m&imacr;r ba&hdotb;r</hi> (admiral) and was appointed to the charge of the <hi>naw&amacr;ra</hi> (fleet) of Bengal. On the 1st &Sdotb;afar &Shbarb;amsu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, made an offering of ten elephants, and, receiving the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse, was selected for the title of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and &Zumlb;afar &Khbarb;&amacr;n received the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse. As I had demanded in marriage the daughter of Jagat Singh, eldest son of R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh, I on the 16th sent 80,000 rupees for the <hi>s&amacr;chaq</hi> (a marriage present) to the house of the aforesaid Raja in order to dignify him. Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n sent from the port of Cambay a European curtain (tapestry), the like of which in beauty no other work of the Frank painters had ever been seen. On the same day my aunt, Naj&imacr;bu-n-nis&amacr; Begam,<note n=1>Sister of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m, also known as Fa&khbarb;ru-n-nis&amacr; (Blochmann, p. 322). The MSS. have Ba&khbarb;tu-n-nis&amacr;, and it would seem that the Naj&imacr;bu-n-nis&amacr; of the text is a wrong reading. See Gulbadan Begam&apos;s Memoirs, p. 214.</note> died in the 61st year of her age of the disease of consumption and hectic fever. I promoted her son, M&imacr;rz&amacr; W&amacr;l&imacr;, to the rank of 1,000 personal and 200 horse. A man of M&amacr;war&amacr;&hamza;a-n-nahr, of the name of Aqam &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr;, who for a long time had been in Turkey and was not without reasonableness and religious knowledge, and who called himself the ambassador of the Turkish Emperor, waited upon me at Agra. He had an unknown writing (? illegible letter). Looking to his circumstances and his proceedings none of the servants of the Court believed in his being an ambassador. When T&imacr;m&umacr;r conquered Turkey, and Yildir&imacr;m B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d, the ruler <pb id=pb145 n=145>of that place, fell alive into his hands, he, after levying tribute and taking one year&apos;s revenue, determined to hand back into his possession the whole of the country of Turkey. Just at that time Yildir&imacr;m B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d died, and (T&imacr;m&umacr;r), having handed over the kingdom to his son M&umacr;s&amacr; Cheleb&imacr;, returned. From that time until now, notwithstanding such favours, no one had come on the part of the emperors, nor has any ambassador been sent: how, then, can it now be believed that this person from M&amacr;war&amacr;&hamza;a-n-nahr should have been sent by the emperor? I could in no way understand the affair, and no one could bear witness to the accuracy of his claim: I therefore told him to go wherever he might wish. On the 4th Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-1-awwal the daughter of Jagat Singh entered the harem, and the marriage ceremony was performed in the house of Her Highness Maryam-zam&amacr;n&imacr;. Amongst the things sent with her by R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh were 60 elephants.

<p>As I had determined to conquer the R&amacr;n&amacr;, it occurred to me that I should send Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n. I appointed 12,000 fully armed cavalry under able officers to go with him, and in addition 500 ahadis, 2,000 musketeers on foot, with artillery made up of 70 to 80 guns mounted on elephants and camels; 60 elephants were appointed to this duty. Two million rupees of treasure were ordered to be sent with this army. On the 16th of the said month M&imacr;r &Khbarb;al&imacr;lu-llah, grandson of M&imacr;r Ni&ayin;matu-llah Yazd&imacr;, the whole of whose circumstances and family history has already been written, died of diarrh&oelig;a. In his appearance the traces of sincerity and dervishhood were manifest<corr>.</corr> If he had lived and passed a long time in my service he would have risen to high rank. The bakhshi of Burhanpur had sent some mangoes, one of which I ordered to be weighed; it came to 52&frac12; tolas. On Wednesday, the 18th, in the house of Maryam-zam&amacr;n&imacr;, the feast of the lunar weighing of my 40th year <pb id=pb146 n=146>was held. I ordered the money used in weighing to be divided amongst women and needy persons. On Thursday, the 4th Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-&amacr;&khbarb;ir, &Tumlb;&amacr;hir Beg, the bakhshi of the Ahadis, was given the title of Mu&khbarb;li&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and Mull&amacr;-i-Taqiyy&amacr; &Shbarb;&umacr;star&imacr;,<note n=1>Text wrongly has &Shbarb;am&shbarb;&imacr;r&imacr;. The MSS. have &Shbarb;&umacr;star&imacr;, and this is right. See Blochmann, pp. 208, 209, and 518.</note> who was adorned with excellencies and perfections, and was well acquainted with the science of history and genealogy, that of Mu&hamza;arri&khbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the 10th of the same month, having given Bar&khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;r, the brother of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the title of Bah&amacr;dur &Khbarb;&amacr;n, I dignified him among his fellows. M&umacr;nis &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Mihtar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, presented me with a jug of jasper (jade), which had been made in the reign of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Ulu&ghbarb; Beg G&umacr;rg&amacr;n, in the honoured name of that prince. It was a very delicate rarity and of a beautiful shape. Its stone was exceedingly white and pure. Around the neck of the jar they had carved the auspicious name of the M&imacr;rz&amacr; and the Hijra year in <hi>riq&amacr;&ayin;</hi><note n=2><hi>Riq&amacr;&ayin;</hi> is a kind of writing (Blochmann, pp. 99, 100).</note> characters. I ordered them to inscribe my name and the auspicious name of Akbar on the edge of the lip of the jar. Mihtar<note n=3>Blochmann, p. 417. His name was An&imacr;su-d-d&imacr;n.</note> &Khbarb;&amacr;n was one of the ancient slaves of this State. He had the honour of serving the late king Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n, and during the reign of my revered father had attained the rank of nobility. He regarded him as one of his confidential servants. On the 16th a firman was issued that the country of Sangr&amacr;m,<note n=4>This must be R&amacr;ja Sangr&amacr;m of &Khbarb;arakpur, who had been a rebel. See Blochmann, p. 446 and note.</note> which had been given for a year by way of reward to my son (<hi>farzand</hi>) Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, should be handed over for the same purpose for a year to Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor of the Subah of Behar. On this day I promoted Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n to the rank of 3,000 personal and 2,500 horse, and Y&umacr;suf &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of &Hdotb;usain &Khbarb;&amacr;n Tukriyah, obtained that of 2,000 <pb id=pb147 n=147>personal and 800 horse. On the 24th I gave leave to Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n and the Amirs and men who had been appointed to subdue the R&amacr;n&amacr;. The aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n was honoured with a robe of honour, a horse, a special elephant, and a jewelled sword. Zafar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, having been honoured with a standard, was presented with a private robe of honour and a jewelled dagger. &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n also was presented with a standard, and I gave him a robe of honour and a special elephant. R&amacr;ja B&imacr;r Singh Deo received a robe of honour and a special horse, and Mangl&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n a horse and jewelled dagger. Nar&amacr;yan D&amacr;s Kachhw&amacr;hah, &ayin;Al&imacr; Qul&imacr; Darman, and Hizabr &Khbarb;&amacr;n Tahamtan obtained leave. On Bah&amacr;dur &Khbarb;&amacr;n and Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk the bakhshi jewelled daggers were conferred, and in the same manner all the Amirs and leaders, each one according to his degree, were honoured with royal gifts. A watch of the day had passed when the Khankhanan, who had been selected for the high honour of my &Amacr;t&amacr;l&imacr;q (guardian), came from Burhanpur and waited on me. Delight and happiness had so overpowered him that he did not know whether he came on his head or his feet. He threw himself bewildered at my feet. By way of favour and kindness I lifted up his head and held it in an embrace of kindliness and affection, and kissed his face. He brought me as offerings two strings of pearls and some rubies and emeralds. The value of the jewels was 300,000 rupees. Besides these he laid before me many valuable things. On the 17th Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-l-awwal Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the Diwan of Bengal, came and waited on me, and offered 60 elephants, male and female, and one Egyptian<note n=1>Text Qutb&imacr;, but I think the word is Qib&tumlb;&imacr;, &lsquo;Egyptian.&rsquo;</note> ruby. As he was one of the old servants and he performed every duty, I ordered him to remain in attendance on me. As Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n and his elder brother, Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, could in no way <pb id=pb148 n=148>keep the peace together, I had sent for the former to my own presence, and he yesterday came and waited on me. On the 22nd, &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, made me an offering of a ruby of the weight of seven <hi>&tdotb;&amacr;nk</hi>, which Ab&umacr;-l-q&amacr;sim, his brother, had bought in the port of Cambay for 75,000 rupees. It is of a beautiful colour and well-shaped, but to my belief is not worth more than 60,000 rupees. Great faults had been committed by Dul&imacr;p R&amacr;y, son of R&amacr;y R&amacr;y Singh, but as he took refuge with my <hi>farzand</hi> &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n his offences were pardoned, and I knowingly and purposely passed over his delinquencies. On the 24th the sons of &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n, who had followed after him, arrived and waited on me and produced as an offering the sum of 25,000 rupees. On the same day the said &Khbarb;&amacr;n offered 90 elephants. On Thursday, the 1st Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-&sumlb;-&sumlb;&amacr;n&imacr;, the feast of my solar year was celebrated in the house of Maryam-zam&amacr;n&imacr;. Some of the money I divided among the women, and an order was given that the balance should be distributed to the poor of the hereditary kingdoms. On the 4th of the month I ordered the Diwans to give a jagir, according to his rank, of 7,000 rupees to &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am.

<p>On this day a female antelope in milk was brought that allowed itself to be milked with ease, and gave every day four seers of milk. I had never seen or heard of anything of the kind before. The milk of the antelope, of the cow, and the buffalo in no way differs. They say it is of great use in asthma. On the 11th of the month R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh asked for leave to complete the army of the Deccan to which he had been appointed, as well as to visit Amber, his native place. I gave him a male elephant of my own called Hu&shbarb;y&amacr;r-mast, and gave him leave. On Monday, the 12th, as it was the anniversary of the death of the late king Akbar, in addition to the expenses of that entertainment, which are fixed separately, I sent 4,000 rupees more to be divided among the faqirs and <pb id=pb149 n=149>dervishes who are present in the enlightened mausoleum of the venerated one. On that day I exalted &ayin;Abdu-llah, the son of &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, with the title of Sarfar&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m, son of Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, with that of Tarbiyat &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On Tuesday, the 13th, I sent for &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s daughter, and saw a child so like her father as no one can remember to have seen. The astrologers used to say that her advent would not be auspicious to her father, but would be auspicious to me. At last it became known that they had augured rightly. They said that I should see her after three years. I saw her when she had passed this age. On the 21st of the month &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n determined to clear out the province of the Niz&amacr;mu-l-mulk, into which, after the death of the late king Akbar, some disturbances had found their way, and stated in writing that &ldquo;If I do not complete this service in the course of two years, I shall be guilty (of a fault), on the condition that in addition to the force that had been allotted to that Subah 12,000 more horse with 1,000,000 rupees should be sent with me.&rdquo; I ordered that materials for the army and the treasure should be quickly prepared, and he should be despatched. On the 26th Mu&khbarb;li&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, bakhshi of the ahadis, was appointed bakhshi of the Subah of the Deccan, and I bestowed his place on Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Hdotb;usain &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the M&imacr;r Ba&hdotb;r. On the 1st Rajab, P&imacr;&shbarb;rau &Khbarb;&amacr;n and Kam&amacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who belonged to the servants who were in constant attendance on me (<hi>r&umacr;-&shbarb;in&amacr;s</hi>), died. &Shbarb;&amacr;h Tahm&amacr;sp had given P&imacr;&shbarb;rau &Khbarb;&amacr;n as a slave to my grandfather, and he was called Sa&ayin;&amacr;dat. When he was promoted in the service of the late king Akbar to the daroghahship and superintendence of the <hi>farr&amacr;&shbarb;&khbarb;&amacr;na</hi> (carpet department), he obtained the title of P&imacr;&shbarb;rau. He was so well acquainted with this service that one might say it was a garment they had sewn on the stature of his capacity. When he was 90 years old he was quicker than lads of 14. He had the good fortune <pb id=pb150 n=150>to serve my grandfather, my father, and me. Until he breathed his last he was never for a moment without the intoxication of wine.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Besmeared with wine Fi&ghbarb;&amacr;n&imacr;<note n=1>Fi&ghbarb;&amacr;n&imacr; was a famous poet and also a drunkard. See Rieu, ii, p. 651, and Sprenger, Oude Cat., p. 403. <hi>Fi&ghbarb;&amacr;n&imacr;</hi> also means lamentation, and there is a play in the couplet on the double meaning.</note> went to the dust.
    <l>Alas! if the angels<note n=2>In the Elliot MSS., B.M., the second line is translated &ldquo;Alas! if the angels made his shroud of another kind of odour!&rdquo; The angels meant are Nak&imacr;r and Munkar.</note> smelt his fresh shroud!&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>He left 1,500,000 rupees. He has one very stupid son, called Ri&ayin;&amacr;yat. On account of his father&apos;s claims for services performed, I gave the superintendence of half the farrashkhana to him and the other half to Tu&khbarb;m&amacr;q &Khbarb;&amacr;n. Kam&amacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n was one of the slaves sincerely devoted to my service; he is of the caste of the Kal&amacr;ls of Delhi. On account of the great honesty and trustworthiness that he had shown I made him <hi>bak&amacr;wal-beg&imacr;</hi> (chief of the kitchen). Few such servants are ever met with. He had two sons, to both of whom I showed great kindness, but where are there others like him? On the 2nd of the said month La&ayin;l<note n=3>Blochmann, p. 612.</note> Kal&amacr;want, who from his childhood had grown up in my father&apos;s service, who had taught him every breathing and sound that appertains to the Hindi language, died in the 65th or 70th year of his age. One of his girls (concubines) ate opium on this event and killed herself. Few women among the Musulmans have ever shown such fidelity.

<p>In Hindustan, especially in the province of Sylhet,<note n=4>Cf. Jarrett, ii, p. 122.</note> which is a dependency of Bengal, it was the custom for the people of those parts to make eunuchs of some of their sons and give them to the governor in place of revenue (<hi>m&amacr;l-w&amacr;jib&imacr;</hi>). This custom by degrees has been adopted in other provinces, and every year some children are thus <pb id=pb151 n=151>ruined and cut off from procreation. This practice has become common. At this time I issued an order that hereafter no one should follow this abominable custom, and that the traffic in young eunuchs should be completely done away with. Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n and the other governors of the Subah of Bengal received firmans that whoever should commit such acts should be capitally punished, and that they should seize eunuchs of tender years who might be in anyone&apos;s possession. No one of the former kings had obtained this success. Please Almighty God, in a short time this objectionable practice will be completely done away with, and the traffic in eunuchs being forbidden, no one shall venture on this unpleasant and unprofitable proceeding. I presented the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n with a bay horse out of those sent me by &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s; it was the head of the stable of my private horses. He was so rejoiced over it that it would be difficult to describe. In truth a horse of this great size and beauty has hardly come to Hindustan. I also gave him the elephant Fut&umacr;&hdotb;, that is unrivalled in fighting, with twenty other elephants. As Ki&shbarb;an Singh, who was accompanying Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, performed laudable service, and was wounded in the leg by a spear in the fight with the R&amacr;n&amacr;&apos;s men, so that about twenty noblemen of his were killed and about 3,000 made captive, he was promoted to the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse. On the 14th of the same month I gave an order for M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; to betake himself to Qandahar. A strange occurrence was that as soon as the aforesaid M&imacr;rz&amacr; started from Bakhar for that province the news of the death of Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor of that place, came. Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n was one of the permanent and intimate attendants of my uncle Muhammad &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m, and was known as Tu&khbarb;ta<note n=1>Blochmann, p. 469.</note> Beg. I gave half his rank (the pay of it) to his sons. On Monday, the 17th, I went on <pb id=pb152 n=152>foot on my pilgrimage to the enlightened mausoleum of the late king. If it had been possible, I would have traversed this road with my eyelashes and head. My revered father, on account of my birth, had gone on foot on a pilgrimage to the shrine of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n Sanjari Chi&shbarb;t&imacr;, from Fat&hdotb;p&umacr;r to Ajmir, a distance of 120 kos: if I should traverse this road with my head and eyes, what should I have done? When I was dignified with the good fortune of making this pilgrimage, I saw the building that had been erected in the cemetery. It did not come up to my idea of what it ought to be, for that would be approved which the wayfarers of the world should point to as one the like of which was not in the inhabited world. Inasmuch as at the time of erecting the aforesaid building the affair of the ill-starred &Khbarb;usrau took place, I started for Lahore, and the architects had built it after a design of their own. At last a certain expenditure was made until a large sum was expended, and work went on for three or four years. I ordered that experienced architects should again lay the foundations, in agreement with men of experience, in several places, on a settled plan. By degrees a lofty building was erected, and a very bright garden was arranged round the building of the shrine, and a large and lofty gateway with minarets of white stone was built. On the whole they told me the cost of this lofty edifice was 1,500,000 rupees, equivalent to 50,000 current tumans of Persia and 4,500,000 khanis, according to the currency of T&umacr;r&amacr;n.

<p>On Sunday, the 23rd, I went with a band of courtiers who had not seen it to look at the reservoir in the house of &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &ayin;Al&imacr; like one that had been made at Lahore in the time of my father. The reservoir is 6 gaz by 6 gaz. At its side has been erected a well-lighted room, the entrance to which is through the water, but the water does not get into it. Ten or twelve people could meet in it. He made an offering of some <pb id=pb153 n=153>of the cash and jewels that had accumulated<note n=1>&ldquo;What money and articles he could produce at the time&rdquo; (Elliot, vi, 320).</note> in his time. After looking at the room, and the entering of a number of courtiers therein, I raised him to the rank of 2,000, and returned to the palace. On Sunday, the 14th &Shbarb;a&ayin;b&amacr;n, the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n was honoured with a jewelled sword for the waist, a robe of honour, and a special elephant, and was given leave to go to his duty in the Deccan. R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh, who was attached to him in that service, was raised to the rank of 3,000 personal and 2,000 horse. As it was again represented to me that oppression was being committed by the brethren and attendants of Murtaz&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n on the ryots and people of Ahmadabad in Gujarat, and that he was unable properly to restrain his relations and people about him, I transferred the Subah from him and gave it to A&ayin;&zumlb;am &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and it was settled that the latter should attend at court, and that his eldest son Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n should go to Gujarat as his deputy. The rank of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n was fixed at 3,000 personal and 2,500 horse. An order was given that in company with Mohan D&amacr;s d&imacr;w&amacr;n and Mas&ayin;&umacr;d Beg Hama&zbarb;&amacr;n&imacr; ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr; he should carry on the business of the province. Mohan D&amacr;s was promoted to the rank of 800 with 500 horse, and Mas&ayin;&umacr;d Beg to 300 with 150 horse. Tarbiyat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, one of the personal servants, was given the rank of 700 with 400 horse, and Na&sdotb;ru-llah the same. Mihtar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, whose circumstances have been related, died at this time, and I promoted his son M&umacr;nis &Khbarb;&amacr;n to the rank of 500 personal and 130 horse. On Wednesday, the 4th &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja, &Khbarb;usrau had a son born to him by the daughter of the &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, and I gave him the name of Buland-a&khbarb;tar. On the 6th of the same month Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n sent a picture (with a report) that the <pb id=pb154 n=154>belief of the Franks was this, that the picture was that of T&imacr;m&umacr;r. At the time when Yildir&imacr;m B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d was taken prisoner by his victorious army, a Nazarene, who at that time was ruler<note n=1>Apparently the person spoken of as a Nazarene (Christian) was the Emperor of Constantinople. Can this picture be the original of that prefixed to White &amp; Davey&apos;s translation of T&imacr;m&umacr;r&apos;s Institutes?</note> of Constantinople, had sent an ambassador with gifts and presents in token of submission and service, and an artist who had been sent with the ambassador took his likeness and brought it away. If this story were true, no better gift could be presented to me. But as the picture had no resemblance to any of his descendants I was not satisfied of the truth of the statement.




<div1 id=yr4>
<head>The Fourth New Year&apos;s Feast after the Auspicious Accession.</head>


<p>The passing of the great star that illumines the world into the constellation of Aries took place on the night of Saturday, the 14th &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja, in Hijra 1017 (21st March, 1609), and New Year&apos;s Day that made brilliant the world began with good auspices and rejoicing. On Friday, the 5th Mu&hdotb;arram, in the year 1018, &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &ayin;Al&imacr; died. He was an unrivalled physician; he had derived much profit from Arabic sciences. He had written a commentary on the Canon (of Avicenna) in the time of my revered father. He had greater diligence than understanding, just as his appearance was better than his disposition, and his acquirements better than his talents; on the whole he was bad-hearted, and of an evil spirit. On the 20th &Sdotb;afar I dignified M&imacr;rz&amacr; Bar&khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;r with the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam. They brought from the neighbourhood of Fat&hdotb;p&umacr;r a water-melon, greater than any I had ever seen. I ordered them to weigh it, and it came to 33 seers. On Monday, the 19th Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal, the feast of my annual lunar weighing <pb id=pb155 n=155>was arranged in the palace of my revered mother; a part of the money was divided among the women who had assembled there on that day.

<p>As it had been evident that in order to carry on the affairs of the State in the Subah of the Deccan it was necessary to send one of the princes there, it came into my mind to send my son Parw&imacr;z there. I ordered them to send his equipments and fix the hour for his departure. I summoned to Court Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been nominated to the command of the army against the rebel R&amacr;n&amacr; to arrange certain matters at headquarters, and appointed in his place &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, whom I exalted with the title of F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang. I sent &ayin;Abdu-r-Razz&amacr;q ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr; to carry an order to all the mansabdars of that army not to depart from the orders of the aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and to pay every heed to his thanks and blame. On the 4th Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-l-awwal one of the goatherds, who are a particular tribe, brought before me a gelded goat that had teats like a female, and gave every day sufficient milk to take with a cup of coffee.<note n=1>Perhaps the meaning is enough milk to fill a coffee-cup.</note> As milk is one of the favours of Allah, and the source which nourishes many animals, I looked on this strange affair as an omen for good. On the 6th of the same month, having given him the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse, I sent &Khbarb;urram, son of &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, to the government of the province of Sorath, which is known as J&umacr;naga&ddotb;h (in Kathiyaw&amacr;d). I honoured<note n=2>According to the contemporary, but anonymous, author quoted in Elliot, vi, 448, this was in reward for restoring the sight of &Khbarb;usrau.</note> &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &Sdotb;adr&amacr; with the title of Masihu-z-zam&amacr;n, and gave him the rank of 500 personal and 30 horse. On the 16th a jewelled waist-sword was sent to R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh. On the 22nd, having handed over 2,000,000 rupees for the expenses of the army of the Deccan, which had been ordered for Parw&imacr;z, to a separate treasurer, 500,000 rupees more were given for <pb id=pb156 n=156>the private expenses of Parw&imacr;z. On the 25th, Wednesday, Jah&amacr;nd&amacr;r (his son), who previously to this had been appointed, together with Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka, to Bengal, came and waited on me. In reality it became known to me that he was a born devotee.<note n=1><hi>Maj&zbarb;&umacr;b-i-m&amacr;dar-z&amacr;d.</hi> Probably the meaning is that he was a born idiot.</note> As my mind was taken up with the preparations for the Deccan, on the 1st Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-l-&amacr;&khbarb;ir I nominated the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; as well to that duty. He was honoured with the favour of a robe of honour and a horse. Having promoted Karam Chand, son of Jagann&amacr;th, to the rank of 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse, I sent him in company with Parw&imacr;z. On the 4th of the month 370 ahadi horse were appointed with &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n to the assistance of the army employed against the R&amacr;n&amacr;. One hundred horses were also despatched from the government stables to be given as he thought proper to the mansabdars and ahadis. On the 17th I gave a ruby of the value of 60,000 rupees to Parw&imacr;z, and another ruby with two single pearls, worth about 40,000 rupees, to &Khbarb;urram. On Monday, the 28th, Jagann&amacr;th was promoted to the rank of 5,000 personal and 3,000 horse, and on the 8th of Rajab, R&amacr;y J&amacr;y Singh was promoted to that of 4,000 personal and 3,000 horse, and was dismissed for service in the Deccan. On Thursday, the 9th, Prince &Shbarb;ahriy&amacr;r from Gujarat came and waited on me. On Tuesday, the 4th, I despatched my son Parw&imacr;z on the service of conquering the country of the Deccan. He was presented with a robe of honour, a special horse, a special elephant, a sword, and a jewelled dagger. The Sardars and Amirs who were appointed with him each according to his condition received and were made happy with the favour of a horse, a robe of honour, an elephant, a sword, and a jewelled dagger. I appointed 1,000 ahadis to be in <pb id=pb157 n=157>attendance on Parw&imacr;z for the service of the Deccan. On the same day a representation came from &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n that having pursued the rebel R&amacr;n&amacr; into the hill country into rough places, he had captured several of his elephants and horses. When night came on he had escaped with difficulty with his life. As he had made things go hard with him, he would soon be taken prisoner or killed. I promoted the said &Khbarb;&amacr;n to the rank of 5,000 personal, and a rosary of pearls, worth 10,000 rupees, was given to Parw&imacr;z. As I had given the province of &Khbarb;andesh and Berar to the said son, I also conferred on him the fort of &Amacr;s&imacr;r, and 300 horse were sent with him to be given to ahadis, mansabdars, and whomever else he might consider worthy of favour. On the 26th, Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n B&amacr;rha was given the rank of 2,500 personal and 1,350 horse, and appointed to the faujd&amacr;rship of the Sarkar of Hisar. On Monday, the 4th Sha&ayin;b&amacr;n, an elephant was given to Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On Friday, the 22nd, I gave an order that as <hi>bang</hi> and <hi>b&umacr;za</hi> (rice spirit) were injurious, they should not be sold in the bazars and that gambling should be abolished, and on this subject I issued stringent orders. On the 25th they brought a tiger from my private menagerie to fight with a bull. Many people gathered together to see the show, and a band of Jogis (religious mendicants) with them. One of the Jogis was naked, and the tiger, by way of sport, and not with the idea of rage, turned towards him. It threw him on the ground and began to behave to him as it would to its own female. The next day and on several occasions the same thing took place. As no such thing had ever been seen before and was exceedingly strange, this has been recorded.<note n=1>The story is also told in the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 37, where it is said that the tiger was one brought by a calendar as a present. It had the name of La&ayin;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n and was very tame. It is added that the tiger did no injury to the jogi with his claws or teeth.</note> On the 2nd of the month of Rama&zdotb;&amacr;n, at the request of Isl&amacr;m <pb id=pb158 n=158>&Khbarb;&amacr;n, &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;s<note n=1>The MSS. have &ayin;In&amacr;yat.</note> &Khbarb;&amacr;n was promoted to the rank of 1,500 personal and 800 horse. Far&imacr;d&umacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Barl&amacr;s was promoted to the rank of 2,500 with 2,000 horse. One thousand <hi>tolcha</hi> of gold and silver and 1,000 rupees were given in alms on the day of the procession of the sun into the constellation of the Scorpion, which, according to the general acceptation of the Hindoos, is called the Sankr&amacr;nt. On the 10th of that month an elephant was presented to &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg Y&umacr;z&imacr;<note n=2>I.O. MS. No. 181, &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n.</note> (? the panther-keeper), and Sal&amacr;mu-llah, the Arab, who is a distinguished young man and a relative (son-in-law?) of Mub&amacr;rak, the ruler of Darful.<note n=3>Sal&amacr;mu-llah is mentioned later on (p. 78), and is described as brother&apos;s son of Mub&amacr;rak, who held the country of Jotra (?) and Darful. He is also mentioned in the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 38, where Mub&amacr;rak is described as ruler (<hi>&hdotb;&amacr;kim</hi>) of J&umacr;yza and Saf&umacr;l (?). But a MS. of the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma in my possession only mentions J&umacr;yza or J&umacr;yna. I think J&umacr;yza must be Juina or Juanny, which, according to Sir William Jones, is one of the names of the island of Johanna or Hinzuan (one of the Comorro Islands), and that Saf&umacr;l must be Sofala, a town on the east coast of Africa. Sir W. Jones was landed on Johanna, and has a long account of the island (see his works). The Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma says that Sal&amacr;mu-llah killed himself with drink. There is a short notice of him in the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, ii, 641, where he is called by his title of &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n.</note> On account of some suspicion that &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s had entertained against him, he came to wait upon me. I patronised him, and gave him the rank of 400 personal and 200 horse. Again, another force, containing 193 mansabdars and 46 ahadis, I sent after Parw&imacr;z for service in the Deccan. Fifty horses were also entrusted to one of the servants of the Court to convoy to Parw&imacr;z.

<p>On Friday, the 13th, a certain idea came into my mind, and this rhymed <hi>&ghbarb;azal</hi> was produced:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;What shall I do, for the arrow of loss of thee has pierced my liver!
    <l>So that the (evil) eye not reaching me again may reach another?
    <l>Thou movest as if frenzied, and the world is frenzied for thee.
    <l>I burn rue lest thy eye should reach me.
    <pb id=pb159 n=159><l>I am frenzied at union with my friend, and in despair at her absence.
    <l>Alas for the grief that has o&apos;erwhelmed me!
    <l>I&apos;ve grown mad that I may rush on the pathway of meeting:
    <l>Woe for the time that brought me the news!
    <l>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, the time for humility and prayer is every morning,<note n=1>The I.O. MSS. have a different reading here. Instead of &lsquo;every morning&rsquo; they have &lsquo;renew (humility).&rsquo; The word <hi>n&umacr;r</hi>, &lsquo;light,&rsquo; in the last line probably refers to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s name of N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n.</note>
    <l>I hope that some spark of light may take effect.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>On Sunday, the 15th, I sent 50,000 rupees as <hi>s&amacr;chaq</hi> to the house of the daughter of Mu&zumlb;affar &Hdotb;usain M&imacr;rz&amacr;, son of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Hdotb;usain M&imacr;rz&amacr;, son of Bahr&amacr;m M&imacr;rz&amacr;, son of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Isma&ayin;&imacr;l &Sdotb;afaw&imacr;, who had been demanded in marriage for my son &Khbarb;urram. On the 17th of the month Mub&amacr;rak &Khbarb;&amacr;n Sarw&amacr;n&imacr; was honoured with the rank of 1,000 personal and 300 horse. Five thousand rupees were also given to him, and 4,000 rupees to &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr; B&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg. On the 22nd a ruby and a pearl were given to &Shbarb;ahriy&amacr;r. One hundred thousand rupees were given for the subsistence of the &Umacr;ym&amacr;qs (special cavalry) who had been appointed for service in the Deccan. Two thousand rupees were given to Farru&khbarb; Beg, the painter, who is unrivalled in the age. Four thousand rupees were sent for expenditure on B&amacr;b&amacr; Hasan Abd&amacr;l. One thousand rupees were handed to Mull&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; A&hdotb;mad Muhrkan (engraver) and Mull&amacr; R&umacr;zbih&amacr;n &Shbarb;&imacr;r&amacr;z&imacr; to expend on the anniversary festival of Hazrat &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Sal&imacr;m at his mausoleum. An elephant was given to Muhammad &Hdotb;usain, the writer, and 1,000 rupees to &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &ayin;Abdu-l-Haqq An&sdotb;&amacr;r&imacr;. I gave orders to the Diwans that having raised the rank of Murtaz&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n to 5,000 personal and horse they should give him a jagir. I ordered Bih&amacr;r&imacr; Chand Q&amacr;n&umacr;ng&umacr;, of the Sarkar of Agra, to take 1,000 footmen and equipment from the Zamindars of Agra, and, fixing their monthly pay, to send them to Parw&imacr;z in the Deccan, and 500,000 rupees more were fixed for the expenses of Parw&imacr;z. On Thursday, the 4th &Shbarb;aww&amacr;l, <pb id=pb160 n=160>Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n was promoted to the rank of 5,000 personal and 5,000 horse, Ab&umacr;-l-wal&imacr; Beg &Umacr;zbeg to that of 1,500 and &Zumlb;afar &Khbarb;&amacr;n to that of 2,500. Two thousand rupees were given to Bad&imacr;&ayin;u-z-zam&amacr;n, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, and 1,000 rupees to Path&amacr;n Mi&sdotb;r. I ordered that drums should be given to all of them as their rank had been raised to 3,000 and higher. Five thousand rupees more of the money from my weighing were entrusted for the construction of a bridge at B&amacr;b&amacr; &Hdotb;asan Abd&amacr;l and the building that is there to Ab&umacr;-l-waf&amacr;, son of &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Ab&umacr;-l-fat&hdotb;, in order that he might exert himself and put the bridge and the aforesaid building in perfect order. On Saturday, the 13th, when four gharis of day were left, the moon began to be eclipsed. By degrees the whole of its body was obscured, and it continued till five gharis of night had passed. In order to avert the bad omen of this I had myself weighed against gold, silver, cloth, and grain, and gave away in alms all kinds of animals, such as elephants, horses, etc., the cost of all of which was 15,000 rupees. I ordered them to be distributed among the deserving and the poor. On the 25th, at the request of her father, I took the daughter of R&amacr;m Chand Band&imacr;lab into my service (i.e. married her). I gave an elephant to M&imacr;r F&amacr;&zdotb;il, nephew of M&imacr;r &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f, who had been appointed to the faujd&amacr;rship of Qab&umacr;lah and those regions &ayin;In&amacr;yat-ullah was dignified with the title of &ayin;In&amacr;yat &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On Wednesday, the 1st &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da, Bih&amacr;r&imacr; Chand was granted the rank of 500 personal and 300 horse. A <hi>khapwa</hi> (dagger), adorned with jewels was given to my son B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram. Mull&amacr; Hayat&imacr;, by whom I had sent a message to the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n, with a verbal message containing (expressions of) all kinds of condescension and affection, came and brought before me a ruby and two pearls of the value of about 20,000 rupees, which the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n had sent by him. M&imacr;r Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain, who was in Burhanpur and whom <pb id=pb161 n=161>I had sent for, came and waited on me. I presented &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n Dakhan&imacr; with 2,000 rupees. On the 6th of the aforesaid month, before Parw&imacr;z arrived at Burhanpur, a petition came from the Khankhanan and the Amirs that the Dakhanis had assembled together and were making disturbances. When I discovered that, notwithstanding the nomination of Parw&imacr;z and the army that had proceeded with him and been appointed to his service, they were still in need of support and assistance, it occurred to me that I should go myself, and by Allah&apos;s favour satisfy myself with regard to that affair. In the meanwhile a petition came also from &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n that my coming there would be for the advantage of the daily-increasing State. A petition from &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, from Bijapur, also came, that if one of the trusted ones of the Court could be appointed there to whom he could tell his desires and claims, so that the envoy might convey them to me, he hoped that it might become the means of affording profit to these slaves (i.e. himself). On this account I consulted with the Amirs and loyal men, and told them to represent whatever entered into anyone&apos;s mind. My son &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n represented that inasmuch as so many Amirs had been despatched for the conquest of the Deccan, it was not necessary for me to go in person. If he were ordered, he himself would go and attend on the prince and would, please God, perform this duty while serving him. Those words were approved of by all those who were loyal. I had never contemplated separation from him, but as the affair was an important one I necessarily gave him permission, and ordered that as soon as matters had been arranged he should return without delay, and should not remain more than a year in those regions. On Tuesday, the 17th &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da, he was free to go. I presented him with a special gold-embroidered robe of honour, a special horse with a jewelled saddle, a jewelled sword, and a special elephant <pb id=pb162 n=162>I also gave him a yak-tail standard (<hi>t&umacr;m&amacr;n &tdotb;&umacr;&ghbarb;</hi>). I appointed Fid&amacr;; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was one of my faithful servants, and to whom I gave a robe of honour and a horse and his expenses, promoting him to the rank of 1,000 personal and 400 horse, original and extra, to go with &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n, in order that if it were necessary to send anyone to &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n according to his request, he might despatch him. Lank&umacr; Pandit, who in the time of the late king Akbar had come with offerings from &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, I also gave leave to go with &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n, bestowing on him a horse, a robe of honour, and money. Of the Amirs and soldiers who had been appointed with &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n to the duty of beating back the R&amacr;n&amacr;, men such as R&amacr;ja B&imacr;r Singh Deo, &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, R&amacr;ja Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, and others, with 4,000 or 5,000 horse, were nominated to support &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n. I sent Mu&ayin;tamad &Khbarb;&amacr;n with the announcement that I had made him a <hi>saz&amacr;wal</hi> (i.e. one who urges on others), and that he was to act along with &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n in Ujjain. Out of the men of the palace, I sent 6,000 or 7,000 horse with him, such as Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n B&amacr;rha, &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr; B&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg, Salamu-llah &ayin;Arab, brother&apos;s son of Mub&amacr;rak &ayin;Arab, who had in his possession the province of J&umacr;tra(?)<note n=1>See note above. J&umacr;tra or Jotra is probably a mistake for the island of Johanna, i.e. Hinzuan. Darf&umacr;l is Dazf&umacr;l in I.O. MS. No. 181.</note> and Darf&umacr;l(?) and that neighbourhood, and other mansabdars and courtiers. At the time of giving them leave I gave each one an increase of rank and robe of honour and money for their expenses. Making Mu&hdotb;ammad Beg paymaster of the army, I provided him with 1,000,000 rupees to take with him. I sent to Parw&imacr;z a special horse, and to the Khankhanan and other Amirs and officers who were appointed to that Subah dresses of honour.

<p>After carrying out these matters I left the city for the purpose of hunting. One thousand rupees were given to <pb id=pb163 n=163>M&imacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr; Akbar. As the Rab&imacr;&ayin; Fa&sdotb;l (Spring season) had arrived, for fear any damage should happen to the cultivation of the ryots from the passage of the army, and notwithstanding that I had appointed a <hi>q&umacr;r&imacr;s&amacr;wul</hi><note n=1>Possibly <hi>Q&umacr;r Yas&amacr;wul</hi> is right, but most probably it was a <hi>yas&amacr;wul</hi> attached to the <hi>Q&umacr;r</hi>, for which see Blochmann, p. 50.</note> (Erskine has Kor, the Yasawal) (probably a kind of provost marshal) with the band of ahadis for the purpose of guarding the fields, I ordered certain men to see what damage had been done to the crops from stage to stage and pay compensation to the ryots. I gave 10,000 rupees to the daughter of the Khankhanan, the wife of D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, 1,000 rupees to &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m &Khbarb;ar (i.e. ass) for expenses, and 1,000 to Q&amacr;ch&amacr; the Dakhani. On the 12th, &Khbarb;&amacr;njar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, brother of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, received the rank of 1,000 personal and 500 horse original and extra, and Bah&amacr;dur &Khbarb;&amacr;n, another brother, that of 600 personal and 300 horse. On this day two antelopes with horns and one doe were taken. On the 13th I bestowed on and sent to &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n a special horse. Having promoted Bad&imacr;&ayin;u-z-zam&amacr;n, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, to the rank of 1,000 and 500 horse, I gave him 5,000 rupees for expenses, and he was sent off with &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n for service in the Deccan. On this day two male and three female antelope were killed. On Wednesday, the 10th, I killed a female <hi>n&imacr;lg&amacr;w</hi> and a black antelope with a gun, and on the 15th a female nilgaw and a <hi>chik&amacr;ra</hi> (gazelle). On the 17th of the month two rubies and a pearl were brought to me by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n from Gujarat, as well as a jewelled opium box, which Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n had sent from the port of Cambay. On the 20th I killed with a gun a tigress and a nilgaw. There were two cubs with the tigress, but they disappeared from view in consequence of the thickness of the jungle and the number of trees. An order was given that they should search for and bring them. When I reached the <pb id=pb164 n=164>halting-place my son &Khbarb;urram brought me one of the cubs, and the next day Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n caught the other and brought it. On the 22nd, when I had got within shot of a nilgaw, suddenly a groom (<hi>jilaud&amacr;r</hi>) and two <hi>kah&amacr;r</hi> (bearers) appeared, and the nilgaw escaped. In a great rage I ordered them to kill the groom on the spot, and to hamstring<note n=1>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s conduct was sufficiently brutal, but the text has made it worse than it was by omitting the word <hi>pay</hi> before <hi>p&amacr;y</hi>. The back tendons of the bearers&apos; feet were cut. Their feet were not cut off. Erskine translates the passage rightly, and the I.O. MSS. agree with him.</note> the kahars and mount them on asses and parade them through the camp, so that no one should again have the boldness to do such a thing. After this I mounted a horse and continued hunting with hawks and falcons, and came to the halting-place.

<p>Next day, under the guidance of Iskandar Mu&ayin;&imacr;n, I shot a large nilgaw, and promoted him to the rank of 600 personal and 500 horse. On Friday, the 24th, &Sdotb;afdar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had come from the Subah of Behar, had the good fortune to perform his obeisance to me. He presented as offerings a hundred muhrs, a sword, and five female and one male elephant. The male elephant was accepted. On the same day Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja of Samarkand came from Balkh and paid his respects. He made offerings of an album, some horses, and other presents, and was dignified with a robe of honour. On Wednesday, 6th &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja, Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk, who had been removed from the paymastership of the army against the rebel R&amacr;n&amacr;, ill and miserable, waited on me. On the 14th of the said month, having pardoned all the faults of &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m &Khbarb;ar,<note n=2>This was the same &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m who was a companion of &Khbarb;usrau, and after his capture was sweated in a skin. As he had life left in him he escaped from that destruction, and, on being released, became one of the personal servants, and served His Majesty till by degrees the latter became gracious to him. (Note of Sayyid A&hdotb;mad.)</note> I promoted him to the rank of <hi>y&umacr;zb&amacr;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> (centurion) and 20 horse, and ordered him to go to Kashmir and in <pb id=pb165 n=165>company with the bakhshi of that place hold a muster of the troops of Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n and all the jagirdars and Uymaks in the service or not, and to bring the list. Ki&shbarb;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n, came from the fort of Rohtas and had the good fortune to pay his respects to me.




<div1 id=yr5>
<head>The Fifth New Year&apos;s Feast from the Auspicious Accession.</head>


<p>On Sunday, the 24th &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja (20th March, 1610), after two watches and three gharis the sun entered into the constellation of Aries, which is the house of honour and good fortune, and at this auspicious hour the New Year&apos;s feast was arranged at B&amacr;k Bhal, one of the villages of the parganah of B&amacr;r&imacr;, and according to the rules of my revered father I mounted the throne. On that morning, which was the New Year&apos;s Day that lighted up the world, and coincided with the 1st of Farward&imacr;n of the 5th year from my accession, I held a public reception, and all the nobles and servants of the Court had the good fortune to pay their respects. Some of the nobles&apos; offerings were laid before me. &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am gave a pearl worth 4,000 rupees; Mir&amacr;n &Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n, twenty-eight hawks and falcons, and other gifts; Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, two European boxes, the sides of which were made with slabs of glass, so that whatever was placed inside could be seen from outside in a way that you might say there was nothing between them; Ki&shbarb;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, twenty-two male and female elephants. In the same way each of the servants of the Court laid before me the presents and offerings that they had. Na&sdotb;ru-llah, son of Fat&hdotb;u-llah &shbarb;arbatch&imacr; (in charge of the <hi>&shbarb;arbat</hi>), was placed in charge of the offerings. By S&amacr;rang Deo, who had been appointed to carry orders to the victorious army of the Deccan, I sent souvenirs (<hi>tabarruk</hi>) to <pb id=pb166 n=166>Parw&imacr;z and to each of the officers. I presented &Hdotb;us&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n, son of &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n<note n=1>&Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n was one of the famous officers of Akbar. &Hdotb;us&amacr;m his son was married to Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l&apos;s sister. See Blochmann, p. 440.</note> Bada&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;, who had taken to the ways of a dervish and seclusion, with 1,000 rupees and a <hi>farj&imacr;</hi> shawl. The day after the New Year&apos;s Day I mounted and started for a tiger-hunt. Two males and a female were killed. I gave rewards to the ahadis who had shown bravery and gone in to the tigers, and increased their monthly pay. On the 26th of the same month I went and busied myself mostly with hunting nilgaw. As the air was hot and the (propitious) hour for re-entering Agra had nearly arrived, I went to R&umacr;pb&amacr;s, and hunted antelope in that neighbourhood for some days. On Saturday, the 1st Mu&hdotb;arram, 1019, R&umacr;p &Khbarb;aw&amacr;&sdotb;&sdotb;, who was the founder of R&umacr;pb&amacr;s, presented the offering that he had prepared. That which pleased was accepted and what remained was given him back as a reward. At the same time B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d Mankal&imacr; and his brothers, who had come from the Subah of Bengal, were honoured with paying their respects. Sayyid &Amacr;dam, son of Sayyid Q&amacr;sim B&amacr;rha, who had come from Ahmadabad, also had the same good fortune. He presented an elephant as an offering. The faujd&amacr;rship of the Subah of Multan was given to Wal&imacr; B&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg in place of T&amacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>On Monday, the 3rd Mu&hdotb;arram of the 5th year, I halted at the Mand&amacr;kar Garden, which is in the neighbourhood of the city. On the morning on which was the auspicious hour of entry into the city, after a watch and two gharis had passed I mounted and rode on a horse to the beginning of the inhabited part, and when I came to the immediate neighbourhood mounted on an elephant, so that the people from far and near might see, and scattering money on both sides of the road, at the hour <pb id=pb167 n=167>that the astrologers had chosen, after midday had passed, entered with congratulation and happiness the royal palace. In accordance with the usual custom of the New Year I had ordered them to decorate the palace, which is like the courts of heaven. After seeing the decorations, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n laid before me the offering that he had prepared. Having accepted out of the ornaments and jewels, dresses and goods, whatever I approved of, I gave the rest as a reward to him. I had ordered the clerks of the hunting department to write out (a list of) all the animals that had been killed from the time of my leaving until I re-entered the city. At this time they represented that in 56 days 1,362 animals, quadrupeds, and birds had been killed; the tigers were 7 in number; nilgaw, male and female, 70; black buck, 51; does and mountain goats and antelope (<hi>rojh</hi>), etc., 82; <hi>kulang</hi> (cranes); peacocks, <hi>sur&khbarb;&amacr;b</hi>,<note n=1>Brahmini ducks.</note> and other birds, 129; fish, 1,023. On Friday, the 7th, Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n came from the ports of Cambay and Surat, and had the honour of waiting on me. He had brought jewels and jewelled things, and vessels of gold and silver made in Europe, and other beautiful and uncommon presents, male and female Abyssinian slaves, Arab horses, and things of all kinds that came into his mind. Thus his presents were laid before me for two and a half months, and most of them were pleasing to me. On this day &Sdotb;afdar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who held the rank of 1,000 personal and 500 horse, had an increase of 500 personal and 200 horse, and was presented with a standard, and given leave to return to his former jagir. Standards were also given to Ki&shbarb;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n and Far&imacr;d&umacr;n<note n=2>A son of Akbar&apos;s officer, Mu&hdotb;ammad Qul&imacr; Barl&amacr;s (Blochmann, pp. 342 and 478).</note> &Khbarb;&amacr;n Barl&amacr;s. A fighting elephant for Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n (Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l&apos;s son) was handed over to his son Bi&shbarb;&umacr;tan, to take to his father. I bestowed <pb id=pb168 n=168>1,000 rupees on &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &Hdotb;usain, a descendant of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n Chi&shbarb;t&imacr;, as was usual for the half-year. The Khankhanan had sent as an offering a &ldquo;Y&umacr;suf and Zulai&khbarb;&amacr;&rdquo; in the handwriting of Mull&amacr; M&imacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr;,<note n=1>M&imacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr; was a famous calligrapher. See Rieu, Cat., ii, 531. Can the copy mentioned by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r be that in the Bodleian Library, which Sir W. Jones praised so highly? A writer in the Journal of the Moslem Institute for January-March, 1907, p. 186, suggests that the copy is in the Bankipur Library.</note> with illustrations and in a beautiful gilt binding, worth 1,000 muhrs. This Ma&ayin;&sdotb;&umacr;m, his Wakil, brought and submitted. Up to the day of culmination, which is the conclusion of the New Year&apos;s feast, every day many offerings were laid before me by the Amirs and servants of the Court. Whichever of the rarities was approved of by me I accepted, and gave back what was left. On Thursday, the 13th, corresponding to the 19th Farward&imacr;n, which is the day of culmination of the sun and of gladness and pleasure, I ordered them to prepare an entertainment of different kinds of intoxicating drinks, and an order was given to the Amirs and servants of the Court that everyone might choose the kind of drink he affected. Many took wine and some <hi>mufarri&hdotb;</hi> (exhilarating drinks), whilst some ate what they wished of the preparations of opium. The assembly was successfully held. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n from Gujarat had sent as an offering a throne of silver, inlaid and painted, of a new fashion and shape, which was presented to me. A standard was also conferred on Mah&amacr; Singh. In the commencement of my reign I had repeatedly given orders that no one should make eunuchs or buy or sell them, and whoever did so would be answerable as a criminal. At this time Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n sent some of these evildoers to Court from the Subah of Behar, who were continually perpetrating this vile offence. I ordered these unthinking ones (<hi>b&imacr;-&ayin;&amacr;qibat&amacr;n</hi>) to be imprisoned for life.

<pb id=pb169 n=169><p>On the night of the 12th an uncommon and strange event took place. Some Delhi singers (<hi>Qaww&amacr;l&amacr;n</hi>, see Jarrett, ii, 236) were singing songs in my presence, and Sayyid&imacr;<note n=1>The Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 41, has &Shbarb;ayy&amacr;d&imacr;, &lsquo;a dervish, a hypocrite,&rsquo; and the R.A.S. MS. has Sayyid&imacr; &Shbarb;ayy&amacr;d. &Shbarb;ayy&amacr;d is used at p. 60 to mean an impostor. Here, perhaps, it would mean a buffoon.</note> &Shbarb;&amacr;h was, by way of buffoonery, mimicking a religious dance. This verse of Am&imacr;r &Khbarb;usrau was the refrain (<hi>miy&amacr;n-&khbarb;&amacr;na</hi>) of the song&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Each nation has its right road of faith and its shrine (<hi>qibla-g&amacr;h&imacr;</hi>).
    <l>I&apos;ve set up my shrine (<hi>qibla</hi>) on the path of him with the cocked cap.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>I asked what was the real meaning of the (last) hemistich. Mull&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; A&hdotb;mad,<note n=2>&ayin;Al&imacr; A&hdotb;mad&apos;s father was &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;usain. See Blochmann, p. 53.</note> the seal engraver, who in his own craft was one of the first of the age, and had the title of &Khbarb;al&imacr;fa, and was an old servant, and with whose father I had learned when I was little, came forward and said, &ldquo;I have heard from my father that one day &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n Auliy&amacr; had put his cap on the side of his head, and was sitting on a terraced roof by the bank of the Jumna and watching the devotions<note n=3>It was the bathing of the Hindus that the saint was watching.</note> of the Hindus. Just then Am&imacr;r &Khbarb;usrau appeared, and the &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; turned to him and said, &lsquo;Do you see this crowd,&rsquo; and then he recited this line:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&lsquo;Each race has its right road of faith and its shrine&rsquo; (qibla-g&amacr;h&imacr;).
</lg>


<p>The Am&imacr;r, without hesitating, respectfully did homage to the &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, and addressing him said&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&lsquo;I&apos;ve set up my shrine in the direction of him with the cocked cap.&rsquo;&rdquo;<note n=4>The point of Am&imacr;r &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s hemistich is that <hi>kaj-kul&amacr;h</hi> literally means &lsquo;the awry cap,&rsquo; and so refers to the saint, who had his cap on his ear or on the side of his head. But it also means one who is presumptuous, and has left the true path of religion. It also means, according to Steingass, a beloved person.</note>
</lg>


<p>The aforesaid Mull&amacr;, when these words were uttered, and the last words of the second hemistich passed over his tongue, became senseless and fell down. Conceiving <pb id=pb170 n=170>a great fear from his falling down, I went to his head. Most of those who were present doubted whether he had not had an epileptic fit. The physicians who were present distractedly made inquiry and felt his pulse and brought medicine. However much they beat their hands and feet and exerted themselves, he did not come to. Immediately he fell he had delivered his soul to the Creator. As his body was quite warm, they thought that possibly some life might be left in him. After a short time it became evident that the thing was all over and he was dead. They carried him away dead to his own house. I had never seen this kind of death, and sent money to his sons for his shroud and burial, and the next morning they sent him to Delhi and buried him in the burial-place of his ancestors.

<p>On Friday, the 21st, Ki&shbarb;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who held the rank of 1,500, was promoted to 2,000 personal and horse, and, having been presented with an Iraq horse out of my private stable, a robe of honour and a private elephant, named Ba&khbarb;t-j&imacr;t,<note n=1>I.O. MS. 181 has <hi>Ta&khbarb;t-i-ba&khbarb;t</hi> (Throne of fortune).</note> and the Faujd&amacr;rship of the country of Uch, was dismissed with a view to the punishment of the rebels of that region. B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d Mankal&imacr;, having been honoured with a robe and a horse, was sent off together with his brothers in the company of Ki&shbarb;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n. An elephant from my private stud, by name &ayin;&Amacr;lam-gum&amacr;n, was entrusted to Hab&imacr;bu-llah for R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh and sent. A special horse was sent to Bengal for Ke&shbarb;o D&amacr;s M&amacr;r&umacr;,<note n=2>Ke&shbarb;o D&amacr;s was perhaps the father of Karams&imacr;, one of Akbar&apos;s wives. See Blochmann, p. 310.</note> and a female elephant was now given to &ayin;Arab &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the jagirdar of Jalalabad. At this time Ifti&khbarb;ar &Khbarb;&amacr;n had sent an offering of a rare elephant from Bengal. As I approved of it, it was entered among my private elephants. I raised the rank of A&hdotb;mad<note n=3>Blochmann, p. 465.</note> Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who <pb id=pb171 n=171>had been nominated to the command of the army of Bangash on account of his good service and that of his sons, from his original rank of 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse by 500 more personal. I sent a gold throne<note n=1><hi>Ta&khbarb;t&imacr;</hi>, qu. a signet?</note> of jewelled work for Parw&imacr;z, and a <hi>sarp&imacr;ch</hi>, which was of rubies and pearls, and made at a cost of 2,000 rupees, was sent for &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n by the hand of &Hdotb;ab&imacr;b, son of Sarbar&amacr;h &Khbarb;&amacr;n, to Burhanpur. At this time it became known that Kaukab, son of Qamar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, had become intimate with a Sanyasi, and by degrees his words, which were all blasphemous and impious, made an impression on that foolish fellow. He had made &ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f, son of Naq&imacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f, his cousins, partners in that error. When this affair was discovered, with only a slight frightening they revealed certain circumstances with regard to themselves, the relation of which would be extremely disgusting. Considering their punishment advisable, I imprisoned Kaukab<note n=2>Kaukab is mentioned again at the end of the twelfth year. For notice of his father see Blochmann, p. 485.</note> and &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f after giving them a whipping, and ordered &ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f a hundred lashes in my presence. This special chastisement (was given) for the purpose of carrying out the Divine law in order that other ignorant persons might not be disposed towards the same actions. On Monday, the 24th, Mu&ayin;a&zumlb;&zumlb;am &Khbarb;&amacr;n was despatched to Delhi to punish the rebels and disaffected of that neighbourhood. Two thousand rupees were given to &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n Dakhan&imacr;. I had ordered &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;usain Dar&shbarb;an&imacr; to proceed with certain firmans to Bengal and presents to each of the Amirs of that Subah. I now gave him his orders and despatched him. With an eye on his actions and his approved services, I promoted Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n to the rank of 5,000 personal and horse, and bestowed on him a special dress of honour. <pb id=pb172 n=172>I gave a special dress of honour also to Ki&shbarb;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and presented R&amacr;ja Kaly&amacr;n with an Iraq horse, and similarly to the other Amirs there were given robes of honour or horses. Far&imacr;d&umacr;n Barl&amacr;s, who held the rank of 1,500 personal and 1,300 horse, I promoted to 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse.

<p>On the night of Monday, the 1st &Sdotb;afar, through the carelessness of the servants, a great fire occurred in the house of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan, and before they became aware of it and the fire could be put out many of his properties were burnt. In order to afford consolation to the mind of the &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja and to make up for the loss he had sustained, I gave him 40,000 rupees. On Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n B&amacr;rha, who had been cherished and brought up by me, I bestowed a standard. I increased the rank of Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk, who had been appointed to the Diwanship of Kabul, from his original of 1,000 personal and 225 horse by 200 personal and 275 horse, and dismissed him. The next day I sent a <hi>ph&umacr;l-ka&tdotb;&amacr;ra</hi> (dagger) studded with valuable jewels to Burhanpur to &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n.

<p>A widow woman complained that Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n had taken her daughter by force in the port of Cambay, and after some while, during which he had kept her in his own house, when she enquired for the girl had said that she had died by an unavoidable death. I ordered an enquiry to be made into the affair. After much search I discovered that one of his attendants had been guilty of this outrage, and had him put to death, and reduced Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s mansab by one half, and made an allowance to the woman who had been thus injured.

<p>As on Sunday, the 7th of the month, a <hi>qir&amacr;n-i-na&hdotb;s&imacr;n</hi> (an unlucky conjunction) had occurred, I gave alms of gold and silver and other metals, and different kinds of cereals, to faqirs and indigent people to be divided in most parts of the dominion. On the night of Monday, the 8th, having sent for &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;usain Sirhind&imacr; and <pb id=pb173 n=173>&Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Mu&sdotb;&tumlb;af&amacr;, who were celebrated for the adoption of the ways of dervishdom and the state of poverty, a party was held, and by degrees the assembly engaged warmly in <hi>sam&amacr;&ayin;</hi> and <hi>wajd</hi> (dervish dancing and ecstasy). Hilarity and frenzy were not wanting. After the meeting was over I gave money to each and gave him leave. As M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; Beg Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n repeatedly made representations with regard to provisions for Qandahar and the monthly pay of the musketeers of the said fort, I ordered 200,000 rupees to be sent there from the treasury of Lahore.<note n=1>Elliot, vi, 321.</note>

<p>On the 19th Urdibihi&shbarb;t, in the fifth year of my reign, corresponding with the 4th &Sdotb;afar, there occurred a strange affair at Patna, which is the seat of government of the province of Behar. Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor of the Subah, went off to the jagir to which he had just been appointed, and which was at a distance of 60 kos from Patna, and handed over the fort and the city to the charge of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ban&amacr;ras&imacr; and &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb; Zain-&khbarb;&amacr;n&imacr;, the Diwan of the Subah, and to a number of other mansabdars. With the idea that there were no enemies in that region he did not satisfy himself as he should have with regard to the protection of the fort and city. By chance, at that time an unknown man of the name of Qu&tumlb;b belonging to the people of Uch, who was a mischievous and seditious fellow, came to the province of Ujjainiyya,<note n=2>Ujjainiyya here means Bhojp&umacr;r.</note> which is in the neighbourhood of Patna, with the look of a dervish and the clothes of a beggar, and having made acquaintance with men of that part, who were always seditious, represented to them that he was &Khbarb;usrau, who had escaped from prison and conveyed himself there; saying that if they would accompany and assist him, after the affair had been completed they would be the ministers of his State. In <pb id=pb174 n=174>short, deceiving those simpletons with foolish words he brought them over to him and persuaded them that he was &Khbarb;usrau. He showed those deceived ones the parts about his eyes, where at some time he had produced scars, of which the marks were still apparent, and told them that in the prison they had fastened cups (<hi>ka&tdotb;or&imacr;</hi>) on them and those were the marks.<note n=1>Apparently we may infer from this that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r did blind or attempt to blind his son &Khbarb;usrau, though he says nothing about it. Else why should this impostor pretend that he had marks of the blinding? Tavernier says &Khbarb;usrau was blinded. Du Jarric also tells us that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r blinded &Khbarb;usrau on his way back from Kabul, when he came to the place where &Khbarb;usrau had fought the battle. He was blinded by some juice of a plant being poured into his eyes. The juice resembled milk (qu. <hi>Euphorbia</hi>). One of his captains, who was also a judge, was likewise blinded there along with his son. W. Finch, too, speaks of this outbreak. He also says that &Khbarb;usrau was reported to have been blinded on the battlefield with a glass. Another story was that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r merely caused a handkerchief to be tied over his eyes and had it sealed with his own seal. It is mentioned in Whiteway&apos;s &ldquo;Rise of the Portuguese Power in India,&rdquo; p. 165, note, that fifteen relatives of the King of Ormuz had been blinded by red-hot bowls having been passed close to their eyes.</note> Through these falsehoods and deceit a number of foot- and horsemen had collected round him, and had obtained information that Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n was not at Patna. Considering this a great opportunity, they made a raid, and when two or three hours of the day had passed on Sunday came to the city, and being hindered by nothing went for the fort. &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ban&amacr;ras&imacr;, who was in the fort, obtaining news of this, went in a disturbed state to the gate of the fort. The enemy, who came on with speed, did not give him time to close the gate of the fort. Together with &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;, he betook himself to the side of the river by a wicket gate, and procuring a boat proposed to go to Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n. Those rebels came with ease into the fort and took possession of Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s property and the royal treasury; and some of those wretched creatures who wait on events, who were in the city and its neighbourhood, <pb id=pb175 n=175>joined them. This news reached Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n at Gorakhpur (&Khbarb;arakp&umacr;r),<note n=1>&Khbarb;arakp&umacr;r. The word is written Gora&khbarb;pur in some MSS., but I think it is clear that &Khbarb;arakp&umacr;r is the place meant, for &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;m&amacr;n had lately got Sangr&amacr;m&apos;s estate of &Khbarb;arakp&umacr;r in jagir. The fact, too, that he fought with the impostor at the P&umacr;n P&umacr;n to the east of Patna shows that he was coming back from down the Ganges.</note> and &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ban&amacr;ras&imacr; and &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb; also came to him there by way of the river. Letters came from the city that this wretch, who called himself &Khbarb;usrau, was in reality not &Khbarb;usrau. Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n, placing his trust on the grace and mercy of Allah, and through my good fortune, started without delay against those rebels. In five days he reached the neighbourhood of Patna. When the news of Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s coming reached those scoundrels, they entrusted the fort to one of those whom they had confidence in, and the horse and foot arraying themselves went out for four kos to meet Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n. A fight took place on the bank of the river P&umacr;n P&umacr;n, and after a slight skirmish the array of those ill-fated ones was broken and they became scattered. In great bewilderment a second time that wretch was coming into the fort with a few men. Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n followed him, and did not allow them to close the gate of the fort. Going to Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s house in a state of confusion, they fortified the house and remained there for three watches, and fought. They wounded about thirty people with arrows. After his companions had gone to <hi>jahannam</hi> (hell) he himself became helpless, and asked for quarter, and waited upon Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n. In order to put a stop to this affair, Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n executed him on the same day, and imprisoned some of his companions who had fallen alive into his hand. These items of news one after another reached the royal ear. I summoned to Agra &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ban&amacr;ras&imacr; and &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb; Zain-&khbarb;&amacr;n&imacr; and the other mansabdars who had made default in holding the fort and protecting the city, and ordered their hair and beards <pb id=pb176 n=176>to be cut off, and that they should be clothed in women&apos;s clothes, seated on asses, and paraded round the city of Agra and in the bazars, as a warning and example to others.

<p>At this time representations succeeded each other from Parw&imacr;z and the Amirs appointed to the Deccan and those who were well-wishers of the State, that &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n B&imacr;j&amacr;p&umacr;r&imacr; prayed that they would send to him M&imacr;r Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain Inj&umacr;, on whose words and acts all the rulers of the Deccan had great reliance, that he might associate himself with them and dispel the fear in their minds, and the affairs of that place might be arranged as it might seem proper to &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had chosen the way of loyalty and service. In any case, he might drive out of their minds the fear that was in them, and soothing them might give him hopes of the royal favour. In order to obtain this end, on the 16th of the same month I despatched the above-mentioned M&imacr;r, giving him a present of 10,000 rupees. I increased the former rank of Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which was 1,000 personal and 500 horse, by 500 personal and horse, in order that he might go to the support of his brother Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n in Bengal. At the same time, in order to punish Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, Zamindar of the province B&amacr;ndh&umacr;,<note n=1>Text wrongly has M&amacr;ndhu.</note> who had withdrawn his foot from the circle of obedience and service, I appointed Mah&amacr; Singh, grandson of R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh, to proceed to put down the disaffection in that region and at the same time administer the estate of the jagir of the Raja, which was in that neighbourhood.

<p>On the 20th of the month I gave an elephant to &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n Dakhan&imacr;. As the governor of Jalalabad had written and represented the ruinous state of the fort of that place, I ordered what might be required for the repair of the said fort to be taken from the treasury of <pb id=pb177 n=177>Lahore. Ifti&khbarb;&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n had done approved service in Bengal. On the request of the governor of that Subah I increased his original rank, which was 1,500, by 500. On the 28th a representation came from &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang, containing recommendations in favour of some of the zealous servants who had been sent with him to subdue the rebel R&amacr;n&amacr;. As &Ghbarb;azn&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n J&amacr;lwar&imacr; had shown the greatest zeal of all in this service, I increased by 500 personal and 400 horse his former rank, which was 1,500 personal and 300 horse. In the same manner each one of those persons was promoted according to his services.

<p>Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been sent to Allahabad to bring the throne of black stone, came on Wednesday, the 4th of the month of Mihr (15th September, 1610), and had an audience and brought the stone safe and sound. In truth it was a wonderful slab, very black and shining. Many say it is of a species of touchstone; in length it was one-eighth less than four cubits, and in breadth 2&frac12; cubits and one <hi>tas&umacr;</hi>,<note n=1>A <hi>tas&umacr;</hi>, or <hi>&tumlb;as&umacr;</hi>, is said in Wilson&apos;s Glossary to be the 24th part of a gaz or about a third of an inch. I.O. MS. makes the breadth 3&frac12; cubits 1 tasu. The slab is described in Keene&apos;s Guide and in the N.W.P. Gazetteer, Agra volume. One inscription has the date 1011, or 1602. Archæological Report, lv, pp. 132&ndash;5, says it is 10 ft. 7&frac12; ins. long, 9 ft. 10 ins. broad, and 6 inches thick. It is supported on octagonal pedestals. See also Beale&apos;s Mift&amacr;&hdotb;u-t-taw&amacr;r&imacr;&khbarb;, pp. 300, 301, where a representation of the stone and copies of the inscriptions are given.</note> whilst its thickness may be three <hi>tas&umacr;</hi>. I ordered stone-cutters to carve suitable couplets on the sides of it. They had attached feet to it of the same kind of stone. I often sat on that throne.

<p>As the brothers of &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam became security for him, I brought out of prison &ayin;Abdu-s-Sub&hdotb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was in confinement for certain offences, and promoted him to the rank of 1,000 personal and 400 horse, and appointed him to the faujd&amacr;rship of the Subah of Allahabad, and gave him the jagir of Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the brother of Isl&amacr;m <pb id=pb178 n=178>&Khbarb;&amacr;n. I sent Tarbiyat &Khbarb;&amacr;n to the faujd&amacr;rship of the Sarkar of Alwar. On the 12th of the same month a representation arrived from &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n that the Khankhanan, according to my order, had started for the Court in company with Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and that M&imacr;r Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain, who had been nominated by the Court to go to Bijapur, had also gone from Burhanpur, together with the wakils of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, to Bijapur. On the 21st of the same month I promoted Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n to the subadarship of the Panjab, which is one of the largest charges in my dominions, and gave him a special shawl. Having appointed T&amacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was in the Subah of Multan to the governorship of Kabul, I added 500 horse to the rank of 3,000 personal and 1,500 horse already held by him. At the request of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang, the son of R&amacr;n&amacr; Shankar was also promoted in rank. When Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been sent to Burhanpur to ascertain the numbers of the forces of the Amirs appointed to the Deccan, and to bring the Khankhanan, arrived in the neighbourhood of Agra, he left the Khankhanan some stages off the city and came on in front himself, and was honoured with the good fortune of paying his respects and kissing the threshold. After a few days, on the 12th &Amacr;b&amacr;n, the Khankhanan came and waited on me. As many of those who were loyal had represented the state of his affairs whether true or false, according to their ideas, and I was displeased with him, because the degree of favour and regard that I previously had observed in his case and that I had seen in my revered father had not produced its effect, I did justice in the matter, for previously to this a letter of appointment to the service of the Deccan for a certain time had been given to him, and he had proceeded there in attendance on Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Parw&imacr;z with other nobles for that important matter. After he arrived at Burhanpur he had not looked to the opportuneness of the time, and at an <pb id=pb179 n=179>improper season for moving, and when forage and other necessaries had not been laid in, he had taken Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Parw&imacr;z and his forces above the Ghats, and by degrees, in consequence of want of concert among the Sardars and his treachery, and of conflicting opinions, things had come to such a pass that grain was obtained with difficulty, and not a <hi>m&amacr;n</hi> was to be got for large sums of money. The affairs of the army became so confused that nothing went on properly, and horses, camels, and other four-footed beasts died. In consequence of the exigency of the time he had patched up a kind of peace with the enemy and withdrawn Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Parw&imacr;z and the army to Burhanpur. As this business did not turn out well, all the well-wishers of the State knew that this division (of counsels) and confusion had arisen from treachery and want of arrangement of the Khankhanan, and represented this to the Court. Although this appeared altogether incredible, at last this impression was left upon my mind, and a representation came from &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n to the effect that all this mischief and confusion had arisen through the treachery of the Khankhanan; either this service should be left entirely in his control, or, summoning him to Court, I should appoint to this duty this man whom I had myself cherished and brought up, and appoint 30,000 horse to support this slave (&Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n himself), in order that in the space of two years, having freed the whole of the royal province, now in the possession of the enemy, and having brought the fort of Qandahar<note n=1>A fort in the Deccan &ldquo;sixty miles north of Bidar&rdquo; (Elliot, vi, 70).</note> and other forts on the border into the occupation of the servants of the Court, he should include in the royal dominions the province of Bijapur. If he did not complete this service in that time, he might be debarred from the good fortune of paying his respects (to me) and would not show his face to the servants of <pb id=pb180 n=180>the Court. When the relations between the Sardars and the Khankhanan reached this point, I did not consider it advisable for him to be there any longer, and handed over the command to &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n and sent for him to Court. In reality the cause of my disinclination and want of favour to him was this. The degree of inclination and disinclination towards him in future will be in accordance with whatever may become clear.

<p>I favoured and promoted Sayyid &ayin;Al&imacr; B&amacr;rha, who is one of our distinguished young men, with an increase of 500 personal and 200 horse beyond his previous rank, which was 1,000 personal and 500 horse, and gave D&amacr;r&amacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of the Khankhanan, the rank of 1,000 personal and 500 horse, with the Sarkar of Ghazipur as his jagir. Previously to this I had had the daughter of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Mu&zumlb;affar &Hdotb;usain, son of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Hdotb;usain M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Sdotb;afaw&imacr;, ruler of Qandahar, betrothed to my son Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram, and on this date, the 17th &Amacr;b&amacr;n, as the marriage meeting had been arranged, I went to the house of B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram and passed the night there. I presented most of the Amirs with robes of honour. Some of those confined in the fort of Gwalior I released, and especially &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr; M&imacr;rak. Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n had collected 100,000 rupees from the <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;li&sdotb;a</hi> (directly managed) parganahs. As he was at the head of the army and the service, I handed this over to him as a present. Giving a little gold and silver and some of every kind of jewellery and grain to trustworthy men, I determined that they should distribute them to the poor of Agra. On the same day a report came from &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n that &Imacr;raj, the son of the Khankhanan, had obtained leave from the prince, and according to orders he had despatched him to Court. With regard to what had been ordered in the case of Ab&umacr;-l-fat&hdotb;, of Bijapur, as the above-mentioned was an experienced man, and his being sent would cause despair to the other Sardars of the Deccan to whom promises had been made, he <pb id=pb181 n=181>had (therefore) kept him under surveillance.<note n=1>So in MSS. Apparently &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n&apos;s meaning was that if this Deccani man were sent to Agra (as if to be punished) the other Deccani leaders would be discouraged.</note> An order had been sent that as Ke&shbarb;o D&amacr;s, the son of R&amacr;y Kalah(?), was in the service of Parw&imacr;z, if any impediment should occur in sending him, he (&Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n) should despatch him whether he wished it or not. Immediately on this becoming known to Parw&imacr;z, he gave him leave and said to &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n: &ldquo;These few words from my mouth thou wilt represent, that as I would give my existence and life for the service of my visible God (Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r), what is there in the being or annihilation of Ke&shbarb;o D&amacr;s<note n=2>The text seems corrupt. Apparently I.O. MS. has Sargala, and this may have been Ke&shbarb;o D&amacr;s&apos;s title.</note> that I should show any resistance in sending him? When they (i.e. the king) send for my confidential servants for any reason it produces a feeling of hopelessness and disquietude of mind in the rest, and becoming known in these regions gives an idea of disfavour on the part of our lord and Qibla (place looked towards in worship). As for the rest, it is His Majesty&apos;s order.&rdquo; From the date on which the fort of Ahmadnagar, by the efforts of my deceased brother D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, came into the possession of the heads of the victorious State, up till now, the guardianship and preservation of that place had been entrusted to &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Beg M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Sdotb;afaw&imacr;, who was a relative of the asylum of pardon &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Tumlb;ahm&amacr;sp. After the disturbance of the rebel Deccanis went to a great length, and they besieged the said fort, he had committed no fault in the duties of devotedness and holding of the fort. When the Khankhanan and the Amirs and other leaders who had assembled at Burhanpur in waiting on Parw&imacr;z devoted themselves to the driving back and defeat of the rebels, and from the differences of opinion and quarrels of the Amirs, and the absence of provision of forage and grain, <pb id=pb182 n=182>those who looked after matters of importance brought this large army into improper roads and among hills and difficult passes, they in a short space of time rendered it wretched and impotent, and matters had come to such a pass and the difficulty with regard to grain was such that they were giving a life for a loaf. They then turned back helplessly with their objects unfulfilled. The garrison of the fort, who were expecting aid from this army, on hearing this news, lost heart and stability, and tumultuously wished to vacate the fort at once. When &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Beg M&imacr;rz&amacr; became aware of this he endeavoured to soothe and quiet the men, but though he did his best it had no good result. At last, under an agreement, he vacated the fort, and proceeded to Burhanpur, and on the day mentioned waited on the prince. Representations with regard to his coming reached me, and, as it was clear that he had not been wanting in bravery and loyalty, I ordered his rank of 5,000 personal and horse to be confirmed and a jagir to be given him. On the 9th a petition came from some of the Amirs in the Deccan that on the 22nd &Shbarb;a&ayin;b&amacr;n M&imacr;r Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain had gone to Bijapur. &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n sent his wakil forward for 20 kos, and himself received him at a distance of 3 kos, and took the M&imacr;r by the same road to his own residence.

<p>As the desire to hunt overcame me, at a propitious hour determined by the astrologers, when a watch and six gharis had passed on the night of Friday, the 15th Rama&zdotb;&amacr;n, corresponding with the 10th &Amacr;&zbarb;ar in the 5th year (of my reign), I started to hunt, and made my first halt in the Dahrah Garden, which is near the city. At this stage I gave M&imacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr; Akbar leave to go into the city after bestowing on him 2,000 rupees and a special warm wrapper (<hi>fargul</hi>). In order that the grain and cultivation should not be trodden down by my men I ordered that all should remain in the city but the men who were actually wanted and my personal servants. <pb id=pb183 n=183>Having entrusted the charge of the city to &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n I gave him his leave. On the 14th Sa&ayin;du-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Sa&ayin;&imacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, was given an elephant. On the 28th, corresponding with the 21st Rama&zdotb;&amacr;n, forty-four elephants, which H&amacr;&shbarb;im &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, had sent as an offering from Orissa, were produced before me. Of these one was very good and tame; this one I put in my private stud. On the 28th an eclipse (of the sun, <hi>kus&umacr;f</hi>) took place, in order to do away with the unluckiness of which I weighed myself against gold and silver; it came to 1,800 tolas of gold and 4,900 rupees. This, along with several kinds of vegetables and sorts of animals such as elephants and horses and cattle, I ordered to be divided among deserving people who were unprovided for and helpless poor of the city of Agra and other cities in the neighbourhood.

<p>As the affairs of the army which had been nominated for the subjugation of the Deccan under the command of Parw&imacr;z, and leadership of the Khankhanan and other high Amirs such as R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh, &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n, &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr;, and other mansabdars, and other leaders of every tribe and condition, had ended in this, that they had turned back from half-way and returned to Burhanpur, and all the confidential servants and news-writers who spoke the truth had sent in reports to the Court, that although there were many causes for the ruin of this army, yet the chief reason was the disagreement of the Amirs, especially the treachery of the Khankhanan, it came into my mind that I must send &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am with another fresh and powerful army to make amends for and set to rights some of the improper proceedings that had arisen from the disagreement of the Amirs that has been described. On the 11th of Day he (&Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am) was honoured with the charge of this duty, and an order was given to the Diwans to make preparations and send him off quickly. I appointed &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam, Far&imacr;d&umacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n <pb id=pb184 n=184>Barl&amacr;s, Y&umacr;suf &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of &Hdotb;usain &Khbarb;&amacr;n Tukriyah, &ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Niy&amacr;z&imacr;, B&amacr;z Bah&amacr;dur Qalm&amacr;q, and other mansabdars, near to the number of 10,000 horse, to accompany him. It was settled that in addition to the ahadis who were appointed to this duty 2,000 others should accompany him, making altogether 12,000 horse. Having sent with him thirty lakhs of rupees and several elephants, I gave him his leave and presented him with a magnificent dress of honour, a jewelled sword-belt, a horse with a jewelled saddle<corr>,</corr> a private elephant, and 500,000 rupees for expenses. An order was given that the chiefs of the civil department should recover this from his jagir. The Amirs who were under his orders were honoured with robes of honour, horses, and presents. I increased by 500 more horse the rank held by Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, of 4,000 personal and 3,000 horse, and ordered him to conduct &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am and this army to Burhanpur, and having enquired into (the circumstances of) the destruction of the army, should give the order of the appointment of the &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am to the Amirs of those regions and make them of one purpose and counsel with him. He was to see the state of preparation of the army of those parts, and after arranging all matters should bring the Khankhanan with him to Court. On Sunday, the 4th &Shbarb;awwal, when near the end of the day, I engaged in a cheetah hunt. I had determined that on this day and Thursdays no animals should be killed and I would eat no meat, on Sunday especially because of the respect my revered father had for that day in not being inclined to eat flesh on it, and in forbidding the killing of any animals for the reason that on the night of Sunday his own honoured birth had taken place. He used to say it was better on that day that all animals should be free from the calamity of those of a butcherly disposition. Thursday is the day of my accession. On that day also I ordered that animals should not be killed, so that whilst sporting <pb id=pb185 n=185>I should not shoot an arrow or a gun at wild animals. In hunting with cheetahs An&umacr;p R&amacr;y, who is one of my close attendants, was heading the men who were with him in the hunt at a little distance<note n=1><hi>P&amacr;ra d&umacr;rtar</hi>, but it would seem from the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, ii, 231, five lines from foot, that <hi>p&amacr;ra</hi>, or <hi>b&amacr;ra</hi>, is a word meaning a body of men. Perhaps it is <hi>b&amacr;rah</hi>, &lsquo;twelve.&rsquo;</note> from me and came to a tree on which some kites were sitting. When his sight fell on those kites he took a bow and some pointless arrows (<hi>tukk&amacr;</hi>) and went towards them. By chance in the neighbourhood of that tree he saw a half-eaten bullock. Near it a huge, powerful tiger got up out of a clump that was near and went off. Though not more than two gharis of day remained, as he knew my liking for tiger-hunting, he and some of those who were with him surrounded the tiger and sent some one to me to give me the news. When it reached me I rode there at once in a state of excitement and at full speed, and B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram, R&amacr;m D&amacr;s, I&ayin;tim&amacr;d R&amacr;y, &Hdotb;ay&amacr;t &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and one or two others went with me. On arriving I saw the tiger standing in the shade of a tree, and wished to fire at him from horseback but found that my horse was unsteady, and dismounted and aimed and fired my gun. As I was standing on a height and the tiger below, I did not know whether it had struck him or not. In a moment of excitement I fired the gun again, and I think that this time I hit him. The tiger rose and charged, and wounding the chief huntsman, who had a falcon on his wrist and happened to be in front of him, sat down again in his own place. In this state of affairs, placing another gun on a tripod,<note n=2>At p. 256 we have the phrase <hi>majr&amacr; g&imacr;rand</hi> applied to the directing of cannon against the buildings of Fort Ranthambhor. I confess that I do not know whether Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r fired the gun that was on the stand or the one that Kam&amacr;l loaded.</note> I took aim (<hi>majr&amacr; <pb id=pb186 n=186>giriftam</hi><note n=3><hi>Majr&amacr; giriftam</hi> seems rather to mean here &lsquo;adjusted the tripod,&rsquo; for from what follows it appears that the gun was not then loaded. The Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 47, has <hi>m&amacr;sha r&amacr; z&imacr;r kard</hi>, &lsquo;applied the match&rsquo;(?).</note>). An&umacr;p R&amacr;y stood holding the rest, and had a sword in his belt and a baton (<hi>kutaka</hi>) in his hand. B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram was a short distance off to my left, and R&amacr;m D&amacr;s and other servants behind him. Kam&amacr;l the huntsman (<hi>qar&amacr;wul</hi>) loaded the gun and placed it in my hand. When I was about to fire, the tiger came roaring towards us and charged. I immediately fired. The ball passed through the tiger&apos;s mouth and teeth. The noise of the gun made him very savage, and the servants who had crowded together could not stand his charge and fell over one another, so that I, through their pushing and shock, was moved a couple of paces from my place and fell down. In fact, I am sure that two or three of them placed their feet on my chest and passed over me. I&ayin;tim&amacr;d R&amacr;y and the huntsman Kam&amacr;l assisting me, I stood up. At this moment the tiger made for those who were on the left-hand side. An&umacr;p R&amacr;y let the rest slip out of his hand and turned towards the tiger. The tiger, with the same activity with which he had charged, turned on him, and he manfully faced him, and struck him twice with both hands on the head with the stick he had in his hand. The tiger, opening his mouth, seized both of An&umacr;p R&amacr;y&apos;s arms with it, and bit them so that his teeth passed through both, but the stick and the bracelets on his arms were helpful, and did not allow his arms to be destroyed. From the attack and pushing of the tiger An&umacr;p R&amacr;y fell down between the tiger&apos;s fore-feet, so that his head and face were opposite the tiger&apos;s chest. At this moment B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram and R&amacr;m D&amacr;s came up to the assistance of An&umacr;p R&amacr;y. The prince struck the tiger on the loins with his sword, and R&amacr;m D&amacr;s also struck him twice with his sword, once on the shoulder-blade. On the whole it was very warm work, and &Hdotb;ay&amacr;t &Khbarb;&amacr;n struck the tiger several blows over the head with a stick he had in his hand. An&umacr;p R&amacr;y with force dragged his arms out of the tiger&apos;s mouth <pb id=pb187 n=187>and struck him two or three times on the cheek with his fist, and rolling over on his side stood up by the force of his knees. At the time of withdrawing his arms from the tiger&apos;s mouth, as his teeth had passed through them, they were partly torn, and both his paws passed over his shoulders. When he stood up, the tiger also stood up and wounded him on the chest with his claws, so that those wounds troubled him for some days. As the ground was uneven, they rolled over each other, holding on like two wrestlers. In the place where I was standing the ground was quite level. An&umacr;p R&amacr;y says that God Almighty gave him so much intelligence that he bore the tiger over deliberately to<note n=1>Apparently the meaning is that he rolled the tiger over to the side furthest from Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r.</note> one side (in the original, that side), and that he knew no more. At this time the tiger left him and was making off. He in that state of bewilderment raised up his sword and followed him and struck him on the head. When the tiger turned his face round, he struck him another blow on the face, so that both his eyes were cut, and the skin of the eyebrows, which had been severed by the sword, fell over his eyes. In this state of affairs, a lamp-man of the name of &Sdotb;&amacr;li&hdotb;, as it was time to light the lamps, came in a hurry and by a blind chance<note n=2><hi>K&umacr;rag&imacr;.</hi> The Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 48, says the night was dark, and so the lamplighter blindly (<hi>az k&umacr;rag&imacr;</hi>) fell upon the tiger and was killed. This tiger hunt and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s danger, etc., are described by William Finch (Purchas, i, 430).</note> came across the tiger. The tiger struck him one blow with his paw and knocked him down. To fall and give up his life were the same thing. Other people came in and finished the tiger&apos;s business. As An&umacr;p R&amacr;y had done this service to me and I had witnessed the way in which he offered his life, after he had recovered from the pain of his wounds and had the honour of waiting on me, I bestowed on him the title of An&imacr;r&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; <pb id=pb188 n=188>Singh-dalan. An&imacr;r&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;<note n=1>An&imacr;kini means an army in Sanskrit and Rai is a title meaning leadership.</note> they call in the Hindi language the leader of an army, and the meaning of Singh-dalan is a tiger-slayer. Giving him a special sword of my own, I increased his mansab. I gave &Khbarb;urram, son of &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, who had been appointed to the governorship of the province of Junagadh, the title of K&amacr;mil &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On Sunday, the 3rd &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da, I employed myself in fishing, and 766 fish were caught; these were divided in my presence among the Amirs, <hi>Ibachki&amacr;n</hi> (?),<note n=2>Text, <hi>Zangchiy&amacr;n</hi> (?). I.O. 181 has <hi>Ibachkiy&amacr;n</hi>, i.e. people of the <hi>Ibachk&imacr;-&khbarb;&amacr;na</hi> or closet. See &Amacr;y&imacr;n, Persian text, i, 42, and Blochmann, i, 46.</note> and most of the servants. I eat no fish but those that have scales, but not because the professors of the Shiah faith look on those without scales as unlawful, but the cause of my aversion is this, that I have heard from old men, and it has become known to me by experience as well, that fish without scales eat the flesh of dead animals and fish with scales do not eat it. From this cause, to eat them is contrary to my disposition. The Shiahs know<note n=3>This is said ironically.</note> why they do not eat them and for what reason they consider them unlawful. One of my home-bred camels that was with me in the hunt carried five nilgaws that weighed 42 Hindustani maunds. I had before this sent for Na&zumlb;&imacr;r&imacr; of N&imacr;sh&amacr;p&umacr;r, who excelled other men in the art of poetry, and passed his time in Gujarat as a merchant. At this time he came and waited on me, and imitating a poem of Anwar&imacr;,


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Again, what youth and beauty this is for the world!&rdquo;
</lg>


<p rend="indent(0)">laid before me a poem that he had composed on me. I presented him with 1,000 rupees, a horse, and a robe of honour as a gift for this poem. I had also sent for &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Ham&imacr;d Gujar&amacr;t&imacr;, whom Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n greatly <pb id=pb189 n=189>praised, and he came and waited on me. His good qualities and purity were better than his doctoring. He waited on me for some time. When it became known that there was no physician but himself in Gujarat, and I found he himself desired leave to go, I gave him and his sons 1,000 rupees and some shawls, and set aside a whole village for his maintenance; he went off to his native place quite happy. Y&umacr;suf &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of &Hdotb;usain &Khbarb;&amacr;n Tukriyah, came from his jagir and waited on me. On Thursday, the 10th &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja, was the festival of the Qurb&amacr;n (the sacrifice of Ishmael). As it is forbidden to take life on that day (Thursday), I ordered that on the Friday they should kill the sacrificial animals. Having sacrificed three sheep with my own hand, I mounted to go hunting, and returned when six gharis of night had passed. On this day was killed a nilgaw (commonly called blue bull) of the weight of 9 maunds and 35 seers. The story of this nilgaw is written because it is not devoid of strangeness. In the two past years, during which I had come to this same place to wander about and hunt I had shot at him each time with a gun. As the wounds were not in a fatal place, he had not fallen, but gone off. This time again I saw that nilgaw in the hunting-ground (<hi>&shbarb;ik&amacr;rg&amacr;h</hi>), and the watchman recognized that in the two previous years he had gone away wounded. In short, I fired at him again three times on that day. It was in vain. I pursued him rapidly on foot for three kos, but however much I exerted myself I could not catch him. At last I made a vow that if this nilgaw fell I would have his flesh cooked, and for the soul of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n would give it to eat to poor people. I also vowed a muhr and one rupee to my revered father. Soon after this the nilgaw became worn out with moving, and I ran to his head and ordered them to make it lawful (cut its throat in the name of Allah) on the spot, and having brought it to the camp I fulfilled my vow as I had proposed. They cooked <pb id=pb190 n=190>the nilgaw, and expending the muhr and rupee on sweets. I assembled poor and hungry people and divided them among them in my own presence. Two or three days afterwards I saw another nilgaw. However much I exerted myself and wished he would stand still in one place, so that I might fire at him, I could get no chance. With my gun on my shoulder I followed him till near evening until it was sunset, and despaired of killing him. Suddenly it came across my tongue, &ldquo;&Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, this nilgaw also is vowed to you.&rdquo; My speaking and his sitting down were at one and the same moment. I fired at and hit him, and ordered him, like the first nilgaw, to be cooked and given to the poor to eat. On Saturday, the 19th &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-&hdotb;ijja, I fished again. This time about 330 fish were caught. On the night of Wednesday, the 28th<note n=1>The text has 14th night, but I follow the I.O. MS. 181.</note> of the same month, I encamped at R&umacr;pb&amacr;s. As this was one of my fixed hunting-places and there was an order that no one should hunt in the neighbourhood, a great number of antelope had come together in the desert there, so much so that they came into the inhabited parts and were not subject to any kind of molestation. I hunted for two or three days in those desert plains, and shot, and hunted with cheetahs many antelopes. As the hour for entering the city was near, making two halts on the way, I alighted on the night of Thursday, the 2nd Muharram, in the year 1020 (17th March, 1611), at the garden of &ayin;Abdu-r-Razz&amacr;q Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r&imacr;, which is near, in fact close to, the city. On this night many of the servants of the Court, such as &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n, Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and a number who had remained in the city, came and waited on me. &Imacr;raj also, whom I had sent for from the Subah of the Deccan, had the honour of kissing the threshold. I stayed in that garden also on the Friday. On that day &ayin;Abdu-r-Razz&amacr;q presented his own offerings. As this was the last day for hunting, an order was given <pb id=pb191 n=191>that the duration of the hunt and the number of animals killed should be counted up to me. The time of the hunt was from the 9th of the month of &Amacr;&zbarb;ar to the 29th Isfand&amacr;rmu&zbarb; of the 5th year, or three months and twenty days. In this time tigers 12, deer (<hi>g&amacr;wzan</hi>) 1, <hi>chik&amacr;rah</hi> (gazelle) 44, <hi>k&umacr;t&amacr;h-p&amacr;cha</hi> (hog-deer) 1 head, fawns 2 head, black buck 68 head, does 31 head, foxes 4, <hi>k&umacr;r&amacr;ra</hi> deer 8, <hi>p&amacr;tal</hi> (?) 1, bears 5, hyænas 3, hares 6, nilgaw 108, fish 1,096, eagle 1, bustard 1, peafowl 5, herons 5, partridges 5, brahmin&imacr; ducks (<hi>sur&khbarb;&amacr;b</hi>) 1, <hi>s&amacr;ras</hi> 5, <hi>dh&imacr;k</hi> (?) 1; total, 1,414.

<p>On Saturday, the 29th Isfand&amacr;rmu&zbarb;, corresponding to the 4th Mu&hdotb;arram, I mounted an elephant and went to the city. From the garden of &ayin;Abdu-r-Razz&amacr;q to the palace the distance is a kos and 20 <hi>tan&amacr;b</hi>. I scattered 1,500 rupees to the crowd. At the fixed hour I entered the palace. The bazars had been decorated with cloths after the manner of the New Year&apos;s feast. As at the hunting-time an order had been given to &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n to prepare in the <hi>Ma&hdotb;all</hi> (Zenanah) a building fit for me to sit in, the said &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja had in the space of three months prepared and brought to perfection this kind of lofty building, and with folded hands (in humility) had done exceedingly active work. Coming off the dust of the road I entered that Paradise-like building and went to look round that abode, and it was very much to my taste. &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n was dignified with much praise and commendation. The offerings he had prepared were displayed to me in the same building. Some of these were approved and accepted and the remainder presented to him.




<div1 id=yr6>
<head>The Sixth New Year&apos;s Feast after my auspicious Accession.</head>


<p>Two gharis and forty seconds of day had passed on the Monday when the sun (lit. his honour the greatest star) entered his tower of honour, which is in the constellation of <pb id=pb192 n=192>Aries. That day was the 1st Farward&imacr;n, corresponding with the 6th Mu&hdotb;arram<note n=1>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r does not mention that it was in this year that he married N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n. He saw her on New Year&apos;s Day (Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 56), and it appears from a note of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r on p. 132 of B.M. MS. Or. 3276 that he married her on 14th &Khbarb;urd&amacr;d (end of May, 1611). It was in the 11th year that she got the title of N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n. Before that she was known as N&umacr;r-Ma&hdotb;all. It would seem that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r married N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n four years and a few days after her first husband&apos;s death.</note> (21st March, 1611). The feast of the New Year having been prepared, I seated myself on the throne of good fortune. The Amirs and all the servants of the Court enjoyed the good fortune of waiting on me and gave their congratulations. The offerings of the servants of the Court M&imacr;r&amacr;n &Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n, &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang, and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, were laid before me. On Wednesday, the 8th Mu&hdotb;arram, the offering of R&amacr;ja Kaly&amacr;n, who had sent it from Bengal, was laid before me. On Thursday, the 9th of the same month, &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n and some of the mansabdars, who had come on summons from the Deccan, waited on me. I gave a jewelled waist-dagger to Razz&amacr;q-wird&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg. On the same day the New Year&apos;s offering of Murtaz&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n was laid before me. He had prepared all kinds of things. Having inspected all these, I took what I approved in the shape of valuable jewels, fine cloths, elephants, and horses and gave back the rest. I presented a jewelled dagger to Ab&umacr;-l-fat&hdotb; Dakhan&imacr;, 3,000 rupees to M&imacr;r &ayin;Abdu-llah, and an Iraq horse to Muq&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n. I increased the rank of &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which was 1,500 personal and 100 horse, by 500 personal and horse. I had summoned him from the Deccan for the purpose of sending him to Bengal to Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, in reality to take his place permanently, and I entrusted him with the charge of that Subah. &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan laid before me (as offerings) two rubies, one royal pearl, and ten rings. I gave &Imacr;raj, the son of &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n, a jewelled dagger. The rank of &Khbarb;urram was 8,000 personal and 5,000 horse; I increased his personal allowance by 2,000, and <pb id=pb193 n=193>increased that of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n, which was 1,500 personal, 1,000 horse by 500 personal, 200 horse. On 24th Mu&hdotb;arram, 18th Farward&imacr;n, the day of the ascendant, Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr; Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n, ambassador of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s, ruler of Persia, who had come on a visit of condolence on the death of the late king and with congratulations on my accession, had the honour of waiting on me, and laid before me the gifts &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s, my brother, had sent. He had brought good horses, cloth stuffs, and every kind of fitting present. After he had presented the gifts, on the same day I gave him a superb robe of honour and 30,000 rupees, which were equivalent to 1,000 Persian tumans. He handed me a letter in which were mingled congratulations and condolences for the death of my revered father. As in the letter of congratulation he expressed the greatest friendship, and omitted no point of regard and concord, it has pleased me to enter here an exact copy of it.


<q rend=block><p><hi>Copy of the letter of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s.</hi>


<p>&ldquo;May the sprinklings of the cloud of the grace of God and the dropping of the favour of the Almighty impart freshness to the gardens of wonderful men and inventors (of new things)! May the flower-bed of sovereignty and rule and the mead of magnificence and exalted happiness of his Honour of heavenly dignity, of sun-like grandeur, the king whose fortune is young, of Saturn-like majesty, the renowned prince, possessing the authority of the spheres, the Khedive, the world-gripper (Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r) and country-conquering sovereign, the prince of the exaltedness of Sikandar, with the banner of Darius, he who sits on the throne of the pavilion of greatness and glory, the possessor of the (seven) climes, the increaser of the joys of good fortune and prosperity, adorner of the gardens of happiness, decorator of the rose-parterre, lord of the happy conjunction (of the planets), the opener of the countenance, <pb id=pb194 n=194>the perfection of kinghood, expounder of the mysteries of the sky, the adornment of the face of learning and insight, index of the book of creation, compendium of human perfections, mirror of the glory of God, elevator of the lofty soul, increaser of good fortune and of the beneficent ascension, sun of the grandeur of the skies, the shadow of the benignity of the Creator, he who has the dignity of Jamsh&imacr;d among the stars of the host of heaven, lord of conjunction, refuge of the world, river of the favours of Allah, and fountain of unending mercy, verdure of the plain of purity, may his land (lit. surface) be guarded from the calamity of the evil eye; may his fountain of perfection be preserved in truth, his desire and love; the tale of his good qualities and benevolence cannot be written.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;&lsquo;The pen has not the tongue to express the secret of love.&rsquo;
</lg>


<p>Although outwardly the distance (between us) prevents my attaining to the <hi>ka&ayin;bah</hi> of desire, yet he is the <hi>qiblah</hi> of my keen longing for spiritual intercourse. Thank God that by virtue of essential oneness this humble supplicant and that pure nursling of glory have in reality been united to one another. The distance of space and outward separation of the body not having prevented nearness of soul and spiritual union, my face is still towards friendship, and accordingly the dust of sorrow has not settled on the sun-like mirror of my mind, but it has received the reflection of the beauty of that exhibitor of perfection, and the olfactory of my soul has been ever scented with the sweet savour of friendship and love and the ambergris-perfumed breezes of affection and concord, and spiritual fellowship and perpetual union have rubbed off the rust from friendship.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;&lsquo;I sit beside thee in thought, and my heart is at ease,
    <l>For this is an union not followed by separation&apos;s pain.&rsquo;
</lg>


<p>&ldquo;Praise be given to the most mighty and pure God that the plant of the desire of true friends hath borne the fruit <pb id=pb195 n=195>of fruition. Success (<hi>maq&sdotb;&umacr;d</hi>), that beauty who for years was hidden behind the veil, has by dint of humility and supplication at the throne of the Almighty, come forth and manifested herself from the hidden bridal chamber, and a ray of perfection has been thrown on the plain of the hopes of the expectants; she has ascended the auspicious throne and seated herself beside the king who adorns the assembly and enhances the glory of the tribune of the king of kings. The world-opening standard of the Caliphate and rule, and the sky-scraping umbrella of justice and world-sway of that creator of the diadem and throne, and that opener of the knots of knowledge and wisdom have cast the shade of equity and sovereignty and mercy over the heads of the inhabitants of the world. My hope is that the chief of desire-granters may make the auspicious ascension of that blessed rising of fortune brighten the crown and illuminate the throne, making it of good omen and prosperous to all, and may the things that appertain to kingship and rule of the world and the causes of dignity and prosperity be ever on the increase! For long past the customs of amity and the ways of intimacy, which have been in existence between our ancestors, and now freshly have been re-established between this one who is bent on friendship and him who is intent on equity, demanded that when the good news of the accession of him who sits on the G&umacr;rg&amacr;n&imacr; throne and is the heir of the crown of T&imacr;m&umacr;r reached this country, one of the confidants of the royal palace should be quickly nominated to convey congratulations, but inasmuch as the business of &Amacr;&zbarb;arb&imacr;j&amacr;n and the conquest of the province of &Shbarb;irw&amacr;n just then occurred, and until my loving mind was satisfied as to the affairs of that province, I could not return to my capital, some delay took place in the accomplishment of this important duty. Although outward ceremonial observances and politenesses have not much weight with people of knowledge and discernment, yet the observance of them is the observance <pb id=pb196 n=196>of the dues of friendship. Of necessity, therefore, at this auspicious time when the attention of the servants of holy angels (?) has been withdrawn from the affairs of that province, which have been arranged in accordance with the desires of my well-wishers, and I am at ease in that quarter, I have returned and settled down in my capital of Isfahan, which is the permanent seat of rule. Therefore I have despatched Kam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n Yadg&amacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr;, who possesses the attributes of nobility, is perfect in sincerity and fully reliable, who is moreover of the number of devoted servants and S&umacr;f&imacr;s of pure design of our family, to the most exalted Court, that after he has obtained the good fortune to salute you, to condole with you, and kissed the carpet of honour, and performed the dues of inquiry (after health, etc.) and congratulations, he may obtain leave to return, and may convey to the sincere mind of your well-wisher the good tidings of the safety of your angelic person and the health of your temperament that is of the brightness of the sun and increases joy. It is hoped that the tree of hereditary friendship and assiduousness, and the garden of intimacy and regard, both apparent and spiritual, which by the irrigation of the rivers of affection and the brooks of sincere regard acquire great splendour and greenness, not casting their leaves, may set in motion the cord of intimacy and drive away the misfortune of estrangement by the arrival of correspondence, which is the communication of the soul, and may connect by spiritual chains our visible friendship, and may favour the course and accomplishment of business.

<p>&ldquo;May God Almighty give the assistance of the secret powers to that living family of dignity and glory and that household of grandeur and good fortune.&rdquo;</q>


<p>Up to this is the copy of the letter of my brother &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s.

<p>My brothers Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Mur&amacr;d and D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, who had died in the lifetime of my revered father, people had called <pb id=pb197 n=197>by several names. I ordered that one of them should be called &Shbarb;&amacr;hz&amacr;da ma&ghbarb;f&umacr;r (the pardoned prince), and the other &Shbarb;&amacr;hz&amacr;da mar&hdotb;&umacr;m (the prince admitted to mercy). I promoted I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah and &ayin;Abdu-r-Razz&amacr;q Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r&imacr;, who each held the rank of 1,500, to that of 1,800, and increased the horse-rank of Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, brother of Isl&amacr;m <corr sic=Kkankhanan>Khankhanan</corr>, by 250. I dignified &Imacr;raj, eldest son of the Khankhanan, with the title of &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and Sa&ayin;du-llah, son of Sa&ayin;&imacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, with the appellation of Naw&amacr;zi&shbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>At the time of my accession I had increased weights and measures (lit. <hi>gaz</hi>), viz. to the extent of three ratis (small weight equal to eight barleycorns), in the weight of muhrs and rupees. At this time it was represented to me that in mercantile transactions it would be for the convenience of the people that muhrs and rupees should be of the same weight as previously. As in all affairs the contentment and ease of the people are to be looked to, I gave an order that from the present day, that is, the 11th Urd&imacr;bihi&shbarb;t in the 6th year of my reign, they should strike muhrs and rupees of the former weight in all the mints of my dominions. As before this, on Saturday, the 2nd of the month of &Sdotb;afar, in the year 1020, the evil-dispositioned A&hdotb;d&amacr;d had heard that Kabul was deprived of an eminent leader, that &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n<note n=1>&Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n was away in the district of Ningnahar (Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 53).</note> was in the interior, and only Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk with a few servants of the aforesaid was in Kabul, thinking it a good opportunity he (A&hdotb;d&amacr;d) betook himself unexpectedly to Kabul with a large number of horsemen and foot-soldiers. Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk, according to the measure of his ability, displayed activity, and the Kabulis and other inhabitants, especially the Farmul&imacr;<note n=2>Text wrongly has Qizilb&amacr;shes.</note> tribe, barricaded up the streets and fortified their houses. The Afghans with some guns came in to the streets and bazars <pb id=pb198 n=198>from different directions. The people from the shelter of their terraces and houses killed many of these wretches with arrows and guns, and Barg&imacr;,<note n=1>Or B&amacr;rk&imacr;.</note> one of the confidential leaders of A&hdotb;d&amacr;d, was killed. From the occurrence of this affair, for fear that the people from all sides and quarters should assemble and block the road for them to get out, giving up their hearts and feet (in a state of distraction), in fear and confusion they turned back. About 800 of those dogs went to jahannam (hell), and 200, having caught horses, hastily escaped with their lives from that deadly place. N&amacr;d &ayin;Al&imacr; Maid&amacr;n&imacr;, who was in Lah&umacr;gar, at last on the same day arrived there, and pursued them for a short distance. As the distance (between them) was too great and his band small, he turned back. For the energy he had shown in coming quickly, and for the activity displayed by Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk, they were both promoted in rank; N&amacr;d &ayin;Al&imacr;, who held that of 1,000 personal to that of 1,500, and Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk, who held the rank of 1,500, to 1,800. As it transpired that &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n and the Kabulis were in the habit of passing their days in carelessness, and the repelling of the evil disposition of A&hdotb;d&amacr;d had taken a long time it occurred to me that as the Khankhanan was without employment I might appoint him and his sons to this duty. Soon after this idea occurred, Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, to summon whom a firman had already been issued, came from the Panjab and obtained the honour of an audience. It became evident from the forehead of his circumstances (his manner) that he was annoyed at the duty of driving back the ill-dispositioned A&hdotb;d&amacr;d being assigned to &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n. As he faithfully promised to take up this duty, it was settled that the governorship of the Subah of the Panjab should belong to Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and that the Khankhanan should remain at home, and that Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n should be promoted to the rank of 6,000 personal and 5,000 horse, and be appointed <pb id=pb199 n=199>to Kabul to drive back A&hdotb;d&amacr;d and the up-country robbers. I ordered the Khankhanan to have a jagir in the Subah of Agra in the Sarkars of Qanauj and Kalpi, that he might inflict condign punishment on the rebels of that region and exterminate them (pull them out by the roots). When I dismissed them I gave each of them special robes of honour and horses and elephants, and having received the robes of exaltation they started <corr sic=of>off</corr>. At the same time, on account of the sincerity of his friendship and his old services, I bestowed on I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah the rank of 2,000 personal and 500 horse, and presented him with a sum of 5,000 rupees by way of gift. Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, whom I had sent to make the necessary preparations for war for the victorious army of the Deccan and point out to the Amirs the desirability of concord and unanimity, paid his respects to me at the capital of Agra on the 12th of the month of T&imacr;r, the 21st of Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-&sumlb;-&sumlb;&amacr;n&imacr;. It was brought to notice in a letter from Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n that &ayin;In&amacr;yat &Khbarb;&amacr;n had performed approved service in the Subah of Bengal; on this account I increased by 500 personal the rank he already held of 2,000. I also increased by 500 personal and 300 horse, so as to make it up altogether to 1,500 personal and 800 horse, the rank of R&amacr;ja Kaly&amacr;n, who was one of the officials of that Subah. I appointed H&amacr;&shbarb;im &Khbarb;&amacr;n,<note n=1>The text has here the word <hi>&ghbarb;&amacr;yatan</hi>, which does not seem to have much meaning. Erskine has &lsquo;without his knowledge,&rsquo; so he probably had <hi>&ghbarb;&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;b&amacr;na</hi> in his MS.</note> who was in Orissa, to the government of Kashmir, and sent his uncle, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain, there to look after the affairs of that country until his arrival. In the time of my revered father his father, Mu&hdotb;ammad Q&amacr;sim, had conquered Kashmir. Ch&imacr;n Qil&imacr;j, who was the eldest son of Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, came from the Subah of Kabul and waited on me. As in addition to his natural excellence he was a <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;naz&amacr;d</hi> (houseborn one), he was honoured with the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and according <pb id=pb200 n=200>to the prayer of his father, and on condition of his undertaking service in T&imacr;rah, I increased his rank by 500 personal and 300 horse. On the 14th Amard&amacr;d on account of the previous service and great sincerity and ability of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-daulah, I bestowed on him the high rank of the viziership of the kingdom, and on the same day presented a belt with a jewelled dagger to Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr;, ambassador of the ruler of Iran. As &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been appointed to command the army against the rebel R&amacr;n&amacr;, promised to enter the province of the Deccan from the direction of Gujarat, I promoted him to be Subahdar of that province, and at his request appointed R&amacr;ja B&amacr;so to the command of the army against the R&amacr;n&amacr;, increasing his rank by 500 horse. In place of Gujarat I conferred the Subah of Malwa on &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am and sent 400,000 rupees to provide for the army and warlike materials for the force that had been appointed to accompany &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n by way of N&amacr;sik, which is near the province of the Deccan. &Sdotb;afdar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, with his brothers, came from the Subah of Behar, and had the honour of kissing the threshold.

<p>One of the royal slaves who was serving in the seal-cutting departments prepared and laid before me a design such as I had never seen or heard of before. As it is exceedingly strange, a detailed<note n=1>Compare Elliot, vi, 324.</note> description of it is given. In the shell of a filbert four compartments had been carved out of ivory. The first compartment was one of wrestlers, in which two men were engaged in wrestling, a third was standing with a spear in his hand, a fourth with a hard stone.<note n=2><hi>Sang-i-duru&shbarb;t&imacr;.</hi> Elliot had the name reading and translates &lsquo;a heavy stone.&rsquo; But both MSS. have <hi>sang u rasan&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;a stone and a cord,&rsquo; query a sling, and this is certainly the right reading. See Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 57.</note> Another was sitting with his hands placed on the ground, while in front of him were laid a piece of wood, a bow and a pot. In the second a throne had been made <pb id=pb201 n=201>above which a <hi>&shbarb;amiy&amacr;na</hi> (a tent-fly or canopy) was depicted, and a man of wealth (a prince) was seated on the throne with one leg placed over the other and a pillow at his back. Five servants were standing around and before him, and tree-boughs threw a shade over the throne. In the third compartment is a company of rope-dancers, who have raised upright a pole with three ropes fastened to it. A rope-dancer upon it (qu. on the ropes?<note n=1>Text <hi>bar p&amacr;y</hi>, but the I.O. MS. and Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 58, have <hi>bar b&amacr;zi</hi> (&lsquo;on the rope&rsquo;? or perhaps &lsquo;is doing gymnastics&rsquo;)</note>) has taken hold of his own right foot with his left hand behind his head, and standing on one foot has placed a goat on the top of the pole. Another person has thrown a drum on his neck and is beating it, whilst another man is standing with his hands lifted up and looking at the rope-dancer. Five other men are also standing, of whom one has a stick in his hand. In the fourth compartment there is a tree, below which the figure of the revered (<hi>&hdotb;a&zdotb;rat</hi>) Jesus is shown. One person has placed his head at Jesus&apos; feet, and an old man is conversing with Jesus and four others are standing by.<note n=2>Note of Sayyid A&hdotb;mad (to the fourth compartment).&mdash;&ldquo;Evidently this masterpiece was not the work of a slave in the seal department, for no reason appears why the portrait of Jesus should be introduced into the fourth compartment. Probably this masterpiece was the work of Frank artists and had fallen into the hands of the slave, and he had ascribed it to his own workmanship. (Perhaps the scene depicted was the Transfiguration.)&rdquo;</note> As he had made such a masterpiece, I honoured him with a present and with increased salary.

<p>On the 30th &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war, M&imacr;rz&amacr; Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n, who had been sent for from the Deccan, came and waited on me. &Sdotb;afdar &Khbarb;&amacr;n had an increase of rank conferred on him, and was appointed to go to the assistance of the army against the rebel R&amacr;n&amacr;. As &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n Bah&amacr;dur F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang had proposed to enter the neighbouring province of the Deccan by way of N&amacr;sik, it occurred to me to appoint R&amacr;m D&amacr;s Kachhw&amacr;ha, who was one of the sincere servants of my <pb id=pb202 n=202>revered father, to accompany him in order that he might in every place look after him, and not allow him to be too rash and hasty. For this purpose I bestowed on him great favours, as well as the title of Raja, which he had not thought of for himself. I also gave him drums and the fort of Ranthanb&umacr;r, which is one of the noted castles in Hindustan, and honouring him with a superb robe of honour and an elephant and horse I dismissed him. I appointed &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan, who had been transferred from the chief Diwanship, to the duty of the Subahdarship of the Deccan, as he had been for a long time in those regions in the service of my deceased brother (D&amacr;niy&amacr;l). I honoured Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan, son of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah, with the title of I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and having promoted the sons of Mu&ayin;a&zumlb;&zumlb;am &Khbarb;&amacr;n to fitting ranks sent them to Bengal to Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n. At the request of Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, R&amacr;ja Kaly&amacr;n was appointed to the government of the Sarkar of Orissa and had an increase in rank of 200 personal and horse. I presented &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n Dakhan&imacr; with 4,000 rupees. On the 7th &Amacr;b&amacr;n Bad&imacr;&ayin;u-z-zam&amacr;n, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, came from the Deccan and waited on me.

<p>About this time, in consequence of the disturbances that had occurred in the country of M&amacr;war&amacr;&hamza;a-n-nahr, many of the Amirs and &Umacr;zbeg soldiers, such as &Hdotb;usain B&imacr;, Pahluw&amacr;n B&amacr;b&amacr;, and Nauras B&imacr; Darman, and Baram B&imacr; and others came to Court and waited on me. They were all honoured with robes of honour, horses, cash, mansabs, and jagirs. On the 2nd &Amacr;&zbarb;ar H&amacr;&shbarb;im &Khbarb;&amacr;n came from Bengal and had the honour of kissing my threshold. I sent 500,000 rupees for the expenses of the victorious army of the Deccan, of which the leader was &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, to Ahmadabad in Gujarat by the hands of R&umacr;p &Khbarb;aw&amacr;&sdotb;&sdotb; and &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Anbiy&amacr;. On the 1st day I went to the village of Samonagar, which is one of my fixed hunting-places, to hunt. Twenty-two antelope were killed, of which I myself killed sixteen and &Khbarb;urram the other six. Remaining <pb id=pb203 n=203>there two days and two nights, on the night of Sunday I returned to the city in health and safety, and one night this couplet threw its brilliance on my mind:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;As long as there&apos;s in heaven light for the sun,
    <l>Be not the reflection far from the Shah&apos;s umbrella.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>I ordered the lamplighters and the relators of stories that at the time of their salutations and telling stories they should commence with this couplet, and it is still in use. On Saturday, the 3rd day, a letter came from &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am that &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n B&imacr;j&amacr;p&umacr;r&imacr; had given up his evil ways and become penitent, and in the rank of servants was now more loyal than ever. On the 14th day, corresponding with the last day of &Shbarb;aww&amacr;l, leave was given to H&amacr;&shbarb;im &Khbarb;&amacr;n to go to Kashmir. I gave a special wrapper<note n=1>See Blochmann, p. 89, note. It came from Europe.</note> (<hi>fargal</hi>) to Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr;, ambassador of Persia. I presented I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n with one of my special swords called Sar-and&amacr;z (thrower of heads). Having honoured &Shbarb;&amacr;dm&amacr;n, son of &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, with the title of &Shbarb;&amacr;dm&amacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n, I increased his rank to 1,700 personal and 500 horse. He was also honoured with a standard. Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, brother of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang, and Arsl&amacr;n B&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg, who had been appointed to the charge of S&imacr;vist&amacr;n,<note n=2>In Scinde; it is the same as Sahwan, and is on the Indus.</note> were also presented with standards. I ordered that <hi>j&amacr;&hamza;i-nam&amacr;z</hi> (prayer carpets) should be made of the skins of the antelopes I had myself killed, and be kept in the public audience hall for people to use in saying their prayers. By way of special respect to the Law I ordered that the M&imacr;r-i-&ayin;Adl and Q&amacr;&zdotb;&imacr;, who are the pivot of affairs of the divine law, should not kiss the ground (before me), which is a kind of <hi>sijda</hi>. On Thursday, the 22nd day, I went again to Samonagar to hunt. As many antelope had collected together in that neighbourhood I had this time sent off &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n to prepare a qamargah and drive in the antelope into a broad place from all sides, to place canvas-walls <pb id=pb204 n=204>(<hi>sar&amacr;-parda</hi>) and a <hi>gul&amacr;l-b&amacr;&rdotb;</hi><note n=1>Blochmann, p. 45.</note> round it. They enclosed a kos and half of ground with sarapardas. When news came that the hunting-place had been prepared and a great deal of game had been confined, I went there and began to hunt on the Friday. Until the next Thursday I went every day to the qamargah with the ladies and hunted as much as I liked. Some of the deer were taken alive and some killed with arrows and guns. On the Sunday and Thursday, on which I do not fire guns at animals, they took them alive in nets. In these seven days 917 head, male and female, were caught, and of these 641 deer were caught alive. Four hundred and four head were sent to Fat&hdotb;p&umacr;r to be let loose on the plain there, and with regard to 84 I ordered them to put silver rings in their noses and set them free in the same place. The 276 other antelope that had been killed with guns and arrows and by cheetahs were divided from day to day among the Begams and the slaves of the palace, and Amirs and servants of the palace. As I became very tired (<hi>dilg&imacr;r</hi>) of hunting, I gave orders to the Amirs to go to the <hi>&shbarb;ik&amacr;rg&amacr;h</hi> (hunting-place) and hunt all that were left over, and myself returned in safety to the city. On the 1st Bahman, corresponding with the 17th &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da, I ordered that in the large cities of my dominions, like Ahmadabad, Allahabad, Lahore, Delhi, Agra, etc., they should arrange bul&ghbarb;ur-&khbarb;&amacr;nas (places for the distribution of cooked food) for the poor; thirty mahalls (districts) had been ordered. Six had already been established, and twenty-four other districts were now ordered. On the 4th Bahman I increased the rank of R&amacr;ja B&imacr;r Singh Deo by 1,000 personal; it was previously 4,000 personal and 2,000 horse: I gave him a jewelled sword. Another sword out of my special ones, that was called &Shbarb;&amacr;h-bacha, (king&apos;s child), was presented to &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the 16th Isfand&amacr;rmu&zbarb;, Bad&imacr;&ayin;u-z-zam&amacr;n, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, <pb id=pb205 n=205>was appointed to the army against the rebel R&amacr;n&amacr; and a sword sent by his hand for R&amacr;ja B&amacr;so. Having again heard that the Amirs on the borders interfere with authority in matters that do not concern them, and do not observe laws and regulations, I ordered<note n=1>Elliot, vi, 325.</note> that the Bakhshis should circulate orders, to be obeyed amongst the Amirs of the borders, that hereafter they should not interfere in such things, which are the private affair of kings. The first thing is this, that they should not sit in the <hi>jharokha</hi> (private window), and should not trouble their officers and captains of the auxiliaries with keeping guard or saluting them, and should not have elephant fights, and should not inflict the punishment of blinding, and should not cut off ears and noses, and should not force Islam on anyone, and should not confer titles on their servants, and should not order the royal servants to do <hi>k&umacr;rni&shbarb;</hi> or prostration, and should not force singers to remain on duty in the manner customary in (royal) darbars, and should not beat drums when they go out, and when they give a horse or elephant to anyone, whether to the king&apos;s attendants or to their own servants, they should not place reins or elephant&apos;s goads on their backs and make them perform obeisance. In going in procession they should not take with them on foot in their retinue the royal attendants. If they write anything to them they should not put a seal on it.<note n=2>Both MSS. have <hi>bar r&umacr;</hi> instead of <hi>bar &umacr;</hi>, &lsquo;in front&rsquo; or &lsquo;in the face&rsquo; of the letter, and this is no doubt the correct reading. See Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 59. See Blochmann, p. 263, for the different places where seals are to be put. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s order apparently was that the provincial governors were not to impress their seals on the face of their letters or other documents.</note> The regulations which have been styled the rules of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r (&Amacr;y&imacr;n-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;) are now in force.<note n=3>The reference seems to be, not to these subsidiary regulations, but to the code of twelve rules promulgated by him at the commencement of his reign.</note>




<pb id=pb206 n=206>
<div1 id=yr7>
<head>The Seventh New Year&apos;s Festival after the auspicious Accession.</head>


<p>On Tuesday, the 1st Farward&imacr;n of the seventh year from my accession on the 16th Mu&hdotb;arram u-l-&hdotb;ar&amacr;m (19th March, 1612) in the year 1021, the New Year&apos;s assembly that illuminates the world, and the festival that brings joy, were held in the capital of Agra. After four gharis of the night had passed on Thursday, the 3rd of the aforesaid month, the hour that the astrologers had chosen, I sat on the throne. I had ordered that, according to annual custom, the bazars should be decorated and the assembly should be kept up until the day of culmination (<hi>r&umacr;z-i-&shbarb;araf</hi>). &Khbarb;usrau B&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg, who was known among the Uzbegs as &Khbarb;usrau <hi>Qimch&imacr;</hi>,<note n=1><hi>Q&umacr;ruqch&imacr;</hi> in I.O. MS. and in Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 60. Steingass gives it as meaning one who looks after the king&apos;s game, and as a sentinel.</note> came on these days and had the honour of waiting on me. As he was one of the influential men of M&amacr;war&amacr;&hamza;a-n-nahr, I bestowed many favours on him, and gave him a fine robe of honour. I gave 15,000 rupees to Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr;, ambassador of the ruler of Iran, for his expenses. On the same day the offering of Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which he had sent from the Subah of Behar, was laid before me. There were 30 elephants and 18 ponies (<hi>g&umacr;n&tdotb;h</hi>), and pieces of Bengal cloth, sandalwood, some pods of musk, aloes-wood (<hi>Agallochum</hi>), and all kinds of things. The offering of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n was also produced before me. He had sent 45 head of horse and two strings of camels, porcelain from China, dressing-gowns (<hi>p&umacr;st&imacr;nh&amacr;</hi><note n=2>Text has <hi>p&umacr;sth&amacr;</hi>, skins, but I.O. MS. has <hi>p&umacr;st&imacr;nh&amacr;</hi>.</note>) of sable (<hi>samm&umacr;r</hi>), and other valuable presents procurable in Kabul and its neighbourhood. The officers of the palace had taken trouble about their offerings, and according to the yearly custom from day to day of the festival the offerings of the servants were laid before me. Having looked at them <pb id=pb207 n=207>in detail, I took what I approved and gave them the remainder. On the 13th Farward&imacr;n, corresponding with the 29th Mu&hdotb;arram, a representation from Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n arrived to the effect that through the blessing of Allah&apos;s favour and through the benign influence of the royal grace, Bengal had been freed from the disturbance of &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n, the Afghan. Before the circumstances of this war are written down, some particulars with regard to Bengal will be recorded.<note n=1>Copied from &Amacr;y&imacr;n. See Jarrett, ii, 115. See also Elliot, vi, 326.</note> Bengal is a country of great extent, and in the second clime its length, from the port of Chittagong to Gar&imacr;, is 450 kos; and its breadth, from the Northern hills to the boundary of Sarkar Mad&amacr;ran, 220 kos. Its revenue is about 60 krores of dams.<note n=2>This is equal to one krore, fifty lakhs of rupees. The Sarkar of Orissa was included in Bengal, and its revenue is included in this. (Note of Sayyid A&hdotb;mad.)</note> The former rulers of this place always had 20,000 horse, a lakh of foot-soldiers, 1,000 elephants, and 4,000 or 5,000 war-boats. From the time of &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n and his son Sal&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, this country was in the possession of the Afghans. When the throne of sovereignty of Hindustan in the hands of my revered father acquired beauty and splendour, he ordered the victorious forces (of the empire) into it, and for a long time made the conquest of it his object, until the aforesaid province, through the great efforts of the chiefs of the victorious State, passed from the possession of D&amacr;&hamza;&umacr;d Kar&amacr;n&imacr;, who was the last of its rulers. That wretch was killed in the fight with &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n, and his army became scattered and in desperate condition. From that date until now the province is in the possession of the servants of the State. In the end a few of the remaining Afghans had remained in the corners and sides of the country, and kept a few distant places in their possession, until, by degrees, most of that body became despised and helpless, <pb id=pb208 n=208>and were captured by the chiefs of the State in the places of which they had still possession. When the arrangement of the affairs of rule and empire, simply through the grace of God, became entrusted to this humble servant of the throne of Allah, in the first year after my accession I sent for R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh, who had been appointed to the rule and government of that place, to Court, and sent Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who, out of all the officials, was distinguished as my foster-brother, in his place. As he entered the province he attained to martyrdom at the hand of one of those mischievous ones who had been appointed to that country, and that man, who had not thought of the consequences, also obtained the reward of his deeds, and was slain. I promoted Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was governor and a Jagirdar in the province of Behar, on account of his nearness to that neighbourhood, to the rank of 5,000 personal and horse, and ordered him to go to Bengal and take possession of the province. I sent an order to Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was at the capital of Agra, to go to Behar and consider that province his jagir. When a short time had passed under the rule of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, he contracted a severe illness, in consequence of the bad water and air of that place, and by degrees the power of the disease and his weakness became so great as to end in his destruction. When the news of his death came to my hearing at Lahore, an order was issued in the name of Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n to proceed as soon as possible to Bengal. When I appointed him to this important duty, most of the servants of the State made remarks on his youth and want of experience. As the excellence of his disposition and his natural capacity had been noticed by my judicious eye, I myself chose him for this duty. As it happened, the affairs of this province were carried on by him in such a manner as from the time when it first entered into the possession of the Chiefs of the everlasting State until this day has never been attained to by any of the servants of <pb id=pb209 n=209>the Court. One of his noteworthy deeds was the driving away of the rebel &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n, the Afghan. He frequently in the time of the late king encountered the royal forces, but his expulsion was not accomplished. When Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n made Dhaka (Dacca) his place of abode and made the subjection of the Zamindars of that neighbourhood his chief object, it occurred to him that he should send an army against the rebel &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n and his province. If he agreed to serve loyally, well and good, but if not, they should punish and annihilate him like other seditious people. At that time &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n<note n=1>Also called &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Kab&imacr;r Chi&shbarb;t&imacr; (Blochmann, p. 519; Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, ii, 630).</note> joined Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and the lot of leading in this service<note n=2>Perhaps this is only rhetoric, but Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l describes how lots were cast between him and R&amacr;ja B&imacr;rbal as to who should go on the Y&umacr;sufzai expedition.</note> fell on his name. Several others of the State servants were also appointed to go with him, such as Ki&shbarb;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Ifti&khbarb;&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Sayyid &Amacr;dam B&amacr;rha, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Achhay,<note n=3><hi>Ich&imacr;</hi> means a hawk, but the meaning may be a &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; of Uch. <hi>Acha</hi> is given in Zenker as meaning a father in Turki. The Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma has Ajha.</note> nephew of Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Mu&ayin;tamad &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the sons of Mu&ayin;a&zumlb;&zumlb;am &Khbarb;&amacr;n Ihtim&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and others. He took with him also some of his own men. At the hour when Mu&shbarb;tar&imacr; (Jupiter) was propitious, he started off this band, and appointed M&imacr;r Q&amacr;sim, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Mur&amacr;d, its chief paymaster and news-writer. He took also some of the Zamindars with him to show the road. The victorious armies started. When they reached the neighbourhood of &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n&apos;s fort and land, they sent some eloquent men to admonish him and point out to him the way of loyalty, and bring him back from the road of rebellion to the right path. As much pride had seated itself in his brain-cup, and he had in his head a desire to seize the country, beside other fancies, he turned a deaf ear to their words and <pb id=pb210 n=210>prepared himself for conflict and fight. The battlefield happened to be on the bank of a nullah in a place which was a complete bog. On Sunday (12th March, 1612), the 9th Mu&hdotb;arram, &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, choosing the hour for the fight, arrayed the victorious forces, so that everyone should go to his place and be prepared for the battle. &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n had not settled the battle for that day with himself. When he heard that the royal army had come prepared for battle, having no remedy he himself mounted and came to the bank of the nullah, and arrayed his own horse and foot opposite the victorious army. When the affair grew hot, and the two forces opposed each other, that foolish, obstinate man at the first onset threw his own fighting raging elephant against the advanced guard. After much fighting many of the leaders of the advanced guard, as Sayyid &Amacr;dam<note n=1>Text wrongly has A&ayin;&zumlb;am. See Blochmann, p. 521, note.</note> B&amacr;rha and &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Achhay, attained the dignity of martyrdom. Ifti&khbarb;&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the leader of the right wing, was in no way remiss in attacking, and sacrificed his own life. The band that was with him fought to such a degree that they were all cut to pieces. In the same way Ki&shbarb;war<note n=2>Ki&shbarb;war was the son of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s foster-brother Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n, who was killed by Sh&imacr;r-afgan.</note> &Khbarb;&amacr;n and his band of the left wing bravely sacrificed themselves in the affair of their master, but many of the enemy (lit. those of dark fortune) were also wounded and killed. That evil one (&ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n) took account of the combatants and ascertained that the leaders of the advanced guard and right and left wings were killed. The centre alone remained. He took no account of the killed and wounded on his own side, but attacked the centre (of the royal army) with the same energy. On this side the son and brothers and sons-in-law of &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, as well as other officers, stopped the advance of those lost ones, and attacked them like tigers and leopards armed with claws and teeth. Some of them attained the dignity of <pb id=pb211 n=211>martyrdom, and those that remained alive bore away fatal wounds. At this time (&ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n) drove a raging elephant of the name of Gajpat,<note n=1>The Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma and the B.M. MSS. call it Ba&khbarb;la.</note> which was his premier elephant, at &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who laid hold of his spear and struck the elephant. What does a raging elephant care for a javelin. He then seized his sword and struck him two blows one after another. How did he regard these either! He then drew his dagger and struck him twice with it, but for this, too, he did not turn back, but overthrew &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n with his horse. Immediately he was separated from his horse; calling out &ldquo;Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r &Shbarb;&amacr;h,&rdquo; he leapt up, and his equerry struck the elephant on both front legs a blow with a two-handed sword. As the elephant fell on his knees, the equerry pulled the elephant driver down off the elephant, and &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at with the dagger he had in his hand, and while on foot, struck such blows on the trunk and forehead of the elephant that the elephant roared out at the pain and turned round. As he was severely wounded, he went to his own army and fell down. &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s horse got up safely. As he was mounting his horse those vile ones drove another elephant at his standard-bearer, and overthrew his horse and standard. &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n gave a manly shout and roused the standard-bearer, saying: &ldquo;Be bold: I&apos;m alive and the standard is at my feet (?).&rdquo;<note n=2>These last words seem to be part of &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at&apos;s speech, but see Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 63. See also Elliot, vi, 329, and the translation of the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma account in Appendix L, Stewart&apos;s Cat. of Tippo Sultan&apos;s MSS., p. 275. The Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma says that &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n&apos;s corpulence compelled him to ride on an elephant.</note> At this critical moment all the servants of the State who were present seized their arrows and daggers and swords, and smote the elephant. &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at himself came up and shouted to the standard-bearer to rise, and got another horse for the standard-bearer and mounted him on it. The standard-bearer unfurled the standard and maintained his ground. At the time of this struggle <pb id=pb212 n=212>a (ball from a) gun struck that rebel on his forehead. However much they enquired for the man who fired it he could not be found. When this struck him, he recognized that he was a dead man. Yet for two watches, notwithstanding this fatal wound, he urged on his men to the fight, and the battlefield was still deadly and the struggle warm. Afterwards the enemy turned their faces, and the victorious army pursued them, and continually striking them drove back those vile ones into the place where they had encamped. With arrows and guns those wretches would not allow the royal troops to enter the place where they were. When Wal&imacr;, the brother of &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n, and Mamrez, his (&ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n&apos;s) son and other relations and followers became aware of &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n&apos;s wound, they made up their minds that he would not recover from it, and that if they, defeated and put to flight, should go towards their fort none would reach it alive. They thought it best to remain for the night in the place where they had encamped, and towards the end of the night seek an opportunity and get to their fort. Two watches of night had passed when &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n went to hell. In the third watch they raised his lifeless body, and leaving his tent and the things they had with them in the camp, proceeded to their fortress. The scouts of the victorious army, having obtained news of this, informed &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the morning of Monday the loyalists assembled and decided to follow them, and not allow breathing-time to those of dark fortune. In the end, in consequence of the tired state of the soldiers, and in order to bury the martyrs and out of sympathy for the wounded, they were perplexed in their minds as to going or settling down (where they were). Just at this time &ayin;Abdu-s-Sal&amacr;m, son of Mu&ayin;a&zumlb;&zumlb;am &Khbarb;&amacr;n, arrived with a body of servants of the State, altogether 300 horse and 400 musketeers (<hi>t&umacr;pch&imacr;</hi>). When this fresh body of men arrived it was determined to pursue, and they accordingly went on. <pb id=pb213 n=213>When Wal&imacr;, who after &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n was the stock of the disturbance, learned that &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n with the victorious army had come together with another fresh force, he saw no resource for himself but to go to &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n on the straight line of faith and loyalty. In the end he sent a message that he who had been the cause of the disturbance had gone, and that the body of those who were left were servants and Musulmans. If he would give his word they would wait upon him and would agree to serve the State, giving their elephants as an offering. &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n and Mu&ayin;taqid &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had arrived on the day of the battle and had done approved service, and all those who were loyal, in accordance with the necessity of the time and with what was best for the State, gave their word and encouraged them. On the next day, Wal&imacr; and the sons, brothers, and sons-in-law of &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n all came and waited upon &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n and the other servants of the State. They brought forty-nine elephants as an offering. After the completion of this work &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, leaving some of the royal servants in Adh&amacr;r<note n=1>The text has <hi>dar adh&amacr;r u &tumlb;arf kih dar ta&sdotb;arruf-i-&amacr;n t&imacr;ra-r&umacr;zg&amacr;r b&umacr;d</hi>. I do not know if <hi>adh&amacr;r</hi> is the name of a place or what its meaning is. The I.O. MSS., Nos. 181 and 305, have <hi>arh&amacr;d</hi>. Blochmann, p. 520, on the authority of the Ma&khbarb;zan-i-Af&ghbarb;&amacr;n&imacr;, says the fight took place 100 kos from Dacca and in a place called Nek Ujy&amacr;l, and he points out in a note that there are several Ujy&amacr;ls in Eastern Bengal. Possibly Adh&amacr;r is Udh&amacr;r or Uz&amacr;r, and a corruption of Ujy&amacr;l. The &lsquo;hills of Dacca,&rsquo; referred to by Blochmann, might be Ran Bhawal or the Madh&umacr;p&umacr;r jungle. The Riy&amacr;&zdotb;u-s-sal&amacr;&tumlb;&imacr;n does not mention the site of the battle, and the translator, Maulaw&imacr; &ayin;Abdu-s-Sal&amacr;m, has in his note at p. 175 confounded two &ayin;&Imacr;s&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;ns, and so drawn groundless inferences. Blochmann points out, p. 520, that the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr; says the prisoners were afterwards put to death. The passage is at vol. ii, p. 632. It says they were put to death by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s orders by &ayin;Abdu-llah (who certainly was brute enough for anything). Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, T&umacr;zuk, p. 112, mentions the arrival of &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n&apos;s sons and brothers at Court, so that Blochmann&apos;s statement at p. 520 about their being executed on the road is not correct. It appears, too, they came to Court after &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at&apos;s death. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r says (T&umacr;zuk, p. 112) he made over the prisoners to responsible servants of government. &ayin;Abdu-llah may have been one of these, and <pb>have got rid of his prisoners by killing them. It would appear that the battle with &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n took place to the east or south-east of Dacca, and not near Orissa, as Stewart supposed.</note> and the neighbourhood which was in the <pb id=pb214 n=214>possession of that one of evil fortune, took with him Wal&imacr; and the other Afghans, and on Monday, the 6th of the month of &Sdotb;afar, came to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;rnagar (Dacca) and joined Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n. When the joyful news reached in Agra this supplicant at the throne of Allah, he performed the prostrations of gratitude, and recognized that the driving away of this description of enemy was brought about simply through the unstinted mercy of the Almighty Giver. As a reward for this good service I promoted Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n to the rank of 6,000 personal, and honoured &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n with the title of &ldquo;Rustam of the age&rdquo; (Rustam-zam&amacr;n), as well as increased his rank by 1,000 personal and horse. I also increased the rank of other servants according to the measure of their services, and they were selected for other honours.

<p>When this news first came of the killing of &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n it appeared to be a joke, but by way of ascertaining the truth or falsehood of the words I took an omen from the div&amacr;n of the tongue of the unseen world, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb; of Shiraz, and this &ghbarb;azal<note n=1>The lines occur in &Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb;&hamza; div&amacr;n, under the letter M, Brockhaus&apos; ed., No. 396, but Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r has missed out two lines in his quotation. An Indian lithograph has <hi>ra&khbarb;t</hi> in the first line instead of <hi>&sdotb;abr</hi>, but the latter reading occurs in Brockhaus. In the fourth line <hi>nargis</hi> is a mistake for <hi>t&imacr;rka&shbarb;</hi>. <hi>T&imacr;r-i-falak</hi>, &lsquo;the arrow of the spheres,&rsquo; is also a name for the planet Mercury. <hi>T&imacr;rka&shbarb;-i-Jauz&amacr;</hi> means both a particular constellation in the sign Gemini, which is supposed to resemble a quiver in appearance, and also the strings of a musical instrument. The meaning of the lines seems to be, &ldquo;I have been wounded by the shaft of heaven: give me wine that I may become intoxicated and be able to tie a knot in the quiver-girdle of the Gemini.&rdquo; The appositeness of the <hi>f&amacr;l</hi> is not very apparent, but the mention of an arrow was taken to be an allusion to the death of &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n by a shot from an unknown hand.</note> turned up:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;I make my eyes red and throw patience to the wilds,
    <l>And in such a case throw my heart into the sea.
    <l>I&apos;m wounded by the shaft of heaven:
    <l>Give wine, so that intoxicated I may cast a knot in the girdle of the Twins.&rdquo;
</lg>


<pb id=pb215 n=215><p>As this couplet was very appropriate to the occasion, I drew an omen from it. After some days news came again that the arrow of Fate, or rather of God, had struck &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n, for however much they enquired for him, he who fired the shot was not made manifest. This has been recorded on account of its strange nature.

<p>On the 16th Farward&imacr;n, Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who is one of my chief retainers and the old confidants of the Jahangiri service, who had attained the rank of 3,000 personal and 2,000 horse, came from the fort of Cambay and had the honour of waiting on me. I had ordered him, on account of certain business, to go to the port of Goa<note n=1>Elliot, vi, 331.</note> and buy for the private use of the government certain rareties procurable there. According to orders he went with diligence to Goa, and remaining there for some time, took at the price the Franks asked for them the rareties he met with at that port, without looking at the face of the money at all (i.e. regardless of cost). When he returned from the aforesaid port to the Court, he produced before me one by one the things and rareties he had brought. Among these were some animals that were very strange and wonderful, such as I had never seen, and up to this time no one had known their names. Although King B&amacr;bar has described in his Memoirs the appearance and shapes of several animals, he had never ordered the painters to make pictures of them. As these animals appeared to me to be very strange, I both described them and ordered that painters should draw them in the Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r-n&amacr;ma, so that the amazement that arose from hearing of them might be increased. One of these animals in body is larger than a peahen and smaller than a peacock.<note n=2>They call this in the English language a turkey, and the people of India call it <hi>p&imacr;r&umacr;</hi>; Persian-knowing Indians call it in Persian <hi>f&imacr;lmur&ghbarb;</hi>. They are now plentiful in India. (Note of Sayyid A&hdotb;mad.)</note> When <pb id=pb216 n=216>it is in heat and displays itself, it spreads out its feathers like the peacock and dances about. Its beak and legs are like those of a cock. Its head and neck and the part under the throat are every minute of a different colour. When it is in heat it is quite red&mdash;one might say it had adorned itself with red coral&mdash;and after a while it becomes white in the same places, and looks like cotton. It sometimes looks of a turquoise colour. Like a chameleon it constantly changes colour. Two pieces of flesh it has on its head look like the comb of a cock. A strange thing is this, that when it is in heat the aforesaid piece of flesh hangs down to the length of a span from the top of its head like an elephant&apos;s trunk, and again when he raises it up it appears on its head like the horn of a rhinoceros, to the extent of two finger-breadths. Round its eyes it is always of a turquoise colour, and does not change. Its feathers appear to be of various colours, differing from the colours of the peacock&apos;s feathers. He also brought a monkey of a strange and wonderful form. Its hands, feet, ears, and head are like those of a monkey, and its face like that of a fox. The colour of its eyes is like that of a hawk&apos;s eye, but the eyes are larger than those of a hawk. From its head to the end of its tail it is an ordinary cubit in length. It is lower than a monkey and taller than a fox. Its hair is like the wool of a sheep and its colour like that of ashes. From the lobe of its ear to its chin it is red and of the colour of wine. Its tail is two or three finger-breadths longer than half a cubit, quite different from that of other monkeys. The tail of this animal hangs down like the tail of a cat. Sometimes it makes a sound like a young antelope. On the whole it is a very strange beast. Of the wild birds which they call <hi>tadr&umacr;</hi> (pheasant) till now it has never been heard that they breed in captivity. In the time of my revered father they made great efforts to obtain eggs and young ones but it was <pb id=pb217 n=217>not managed. I ordered them to keep some of them, male and female, in one place, and by degrees they bred. I ordered them to place the eggs under hens, and in a space of two years sixty or seventy young were produced and fifty or sixty grew up. Whoever heard of this matter was astonished. It was said that in the Wil&amacr;yat (Persia?) the people there had made great efforts, but no eggs were produced and no young were obtained.

<p>In these days I increased the mansab of Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n by 1,000 personal and 500 horse, which thus became 4,000 personal and 3,500 horse. The mansab of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah, original and increased, was fixed at 4,000 personal and 1,000 horse. To the mansab of Mah&amacr; Singh also an increase of 500 personal and horse was given: it was originally and with increase 3,000 personal and 2,000 horse. The mansab of I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n was increased by 500 personal and 200 horse, and made up to 1,000 personal and 300 horse. &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan in these days came from the Deccan and waited on me. Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been appointed to the faujd&amacr;rship of Allahabad and of the Sarkar of Jaunpur, came and paid his respects: an increase of 500 was made to his mansab, which was 1,000. On the day of culmination (<hi>r&umacr;z-i-&shbarb;araf</hi>), which was the 19th Farward&imacr;n, I raised the mansab of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram, which was 10,000, to 12,000, and made that of I&ayin;tib&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which was 3,000 personal and 1,000 horse, up to 4,000. I raised the mansab of Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n from 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse by 500 personal and horse; and increased that of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n, which was 2,000 personal and 1,200 horse, by 500. As these were the days of the New Year, many of the servants (of the State) obtained an increase of their mansabs. On the same day Dul&imacr;p came from the Deccan and waited on me. As his father R&amacr;y R&amacr;y Singh had died, I honoured him with the title of R&amacr;y and clothed him in a dress of honour. R&amacr;y R&amacr;y Singh had another son, by <pb id=pb218 n=218>name S&umacr;raj Singh. Although Dul&imacr;p was his <hi>&tdotb;&imacr;k&amacr;</hi> (marked with the <hi>&tdotb;&imacr;k&amacr;</hi>) son, he wished S&umacr;raj Singh to succeed him, in consequence of the love that he bore to his mother. When the circumstances of his death were reported to me, S&umacr;raj Singh, in consequence of his want of intelligence and tender years, represented to me: &ldquo;My father has made me his successor and given me the <hi>&tdotb;&imacr;k&amacr;</hi>.&rdquo; This remark was not to my liking, and I said: &ldquo;If thy father has given the <hi>&tdotb;&imacr;k&amacr;</hi> to thee, we shall give it to Dul&imacr;p.&rdquo; Then marking the <hi>&tdotb;&imacr;k&amacr;</hi> with my own hand, I presented the latter with his father&apos;s jagir and hereditary possessions. I bestowed on I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah an inkstand and jewelled pen. R&umacr;dar, the father of Lakhm&imacr; Chand, Raja of Kumaon, who is one of the considerable Rajas of the hill country, had come in the time of the late King Akbar,<note n=1>Akbar-n&amacr;ma, iii, 533. It was in the 33rd year.</note> and when he came had petitioned<note n=2>He asked &Tdotb;o&ddotb;ar Mal&apos;s protection, but the son was sent (Akbar-n&amacr;ma, iii, 533).</note> that the son of R&amacr;ja &Tdotb;o&ddotb;ar Mal might take him by the hand and bring him to wait on him. In consequence, the Raja&apos;s (&Tdotb;o&ddotb;ar Mal&apos;s) son had been appointed to bring him. Lakhm&imacr; Chand now similarly asked that the son of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah might bring him to pay his respects. I sent &Shbarb;&amacr;p&umacr;r<note n=3>This name is not in all the MSS. It is another name for I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d, son of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah.</note> to bring him to wait on me. He laid before me rare things from his own hill country, such as <hi>g&umacr;n&tdotb;h</hi> ponies, and birds of prey, such as hawks, <hi>jurra</hi> (falcons), royal falcons, <hi>qa&tumlb;&amacr;s</hi> (yaks), navels of musk, and skins of the musk antelope with the musk-bags on them, swords which in their language they call <hi>kh&amacr;n&ddotb;&amacr;</hi>, and daggers which they call <hi>ka&tdotb;&amacr;r</hi>, and all kinds of things. Amongst the Rajas of this hill country this Raja is well known for the large quantities of gold he has. They say there is a gold-mine in his territory.<note n=4>Blochmann, p. 508.</note>

<pb id=pb219 n=219><p>In order to lay the foundation of a palace at Lahore, I sent there &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja D&umacr;st Mu&hdotb;ammad, who is well skilled in this kind of business.

<p>As the affairs of the Deccan, in consequence of the disagreements among the Sardars and the carelessness of &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, did not look well, and the defeat of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n had taken place, I had sent for &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan to make enquiries into the real state of these quarrels. After much enquiry and investigation it became clear that the defeat of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n had been caused by his pride and his sharp temper, and not listening to words (of advice) and partly by the quarrels and want of agreement between the Amirs. Briefly, it had been determined that &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n should start from the direction of N&amacr;sik and Trimbak with the Gujarat army and the Amirs who had been appointed to accompany him. This army had been brought into proper order by trustworthy leaders and zealous Amirs, such as R&amacr;ja R&amacr;m D&amacr;s, &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;lam, Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n, &ayin;Al&imacr; Mard&amacr;n Bah&amacr;dur, &Zumlb;afar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and other servants of the State. The number of the army had passed 10,000 and come up to near 14,000. On the side of Berar it was settled that R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh, &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n, the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr;, and many other leaders should proceed. These two armies should be aware of each other&apos;s marches and halts, so that on an appointed day they might catch the enemy between the two. If this rule had been observed and their hearts had been in unison, and self-interest had not come between, it is most probable that Almighty God would have given them the victory of the day. When &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n passed the Ghats and entered the enemy&apos;s country, he did not take care to send runners (<hi>q&amacr;&sdotb;id&amacr;n</hi>) to bring intelligence from the other army, nor did he, in accordance with the arrangements, make his movements harmonise with theirs, so that on an appointed day they might take the enemy between two armies. Rather he relied on his own strength, <pb id=pb220 n=220>and considered that if he could gain the victory alone it would be better. This idea fixed itself in his mind, and however much R&amacr;m D&amacr;s desired him to promise to go forward with due deliberation, it was of no use. The enemy, who were observing him closely, had sent a large number of leaders and Barg&imacr;s (Mahrattas) against him, and encounters took place with them every day. They did not fail to throw rockets and different fireworks at night. At last the enemy drew near, and yet he obtained no intelligence about the other army, though he had approached Daulatabad, which was the place of assembly of the Dakhanis. &ayin;Ambar, the black-faced, had raised to sovereignty a child who, in his opinion, bore relationship to the family of Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-l-mulk. In order that men might fully accept his (the child&apos;s) sovereignty, he raised him up and took him by the hand, and made himself the Peshwa and leader. He sent men again and again (against &ayin;Abdu-llah), and the number of the enemy was continually increasing till at last they made an attack, and by throwing rockets and other fireworks made matters hot for him.<note n=1>Elliot, vi, 333.</note> At length the loyalists thought it best, as no assistance had come to them from the other army and all the Dakhanis had turned against them, to retreat at once and try some other arrangement. All agreed, and with one consent started off before dawn. The Dakhanis followed them to the boundaries of their own country, and the two armies, meeting every day, did not fail in fighting. In these days several of the ambitious and zealous young men were killed. &ayin;Al&imacr; Mard&amacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Bah&amacr;dur, behaving like a brave man, carried away terrible wounds and fell into the hands of the enemy, and showed his companions an example of fidelity to his salt and of life-sacrifice. &Zbarb;&umacr;-l-faq&amacr;r Beg also displayed manly actions, and a rocket struck him on <pb id=pb221 n=221>the leg, and two days afterwards he died. When they entered the country of R&amacr;ja Bharj&umacr;,<note n=1>Raja of Bagl&amacr;na.</note> who was one of those loyal to the throne, that body (the enemy) turned back, and &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n proceeded towards Gujarat. The real truth is this, that if in going he had drawn his rein (gone slowly) and allowed the other army to have come up to him, the matter would have turned out according to the wish of the chief men of the victorious State.<note n=2>A periphrasis for Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r himself.</note> As soon as the news of the retreat of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n reached the leaders of the army that was advancing from Berar, not seeing any advantage from further stay, they also retired, and joined the camp of Parwiz at &ayin;&Amacr;dil&amacr;b&amacr;d in the neighbourhood of Burhanpur. When this intelligence reached me at Agra I was greatly agitated, and proposed to go there myself and destroy root and branch those servants who had become masters. The Amirs and other devoted ones would in no way consent to this. &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan represented that as no one understood the business of that region as the Khankhanan did I ought to send him, and that he should again arrange matters that had fallen into disorder, and according to the exigencies of the time should compose differences so that affairs might return to their original condition. Other well-wishers being consulted, all their opinions were at one in this, that the Khankhanan must be sent and that &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan should accompany him. Agreeing with this determination, those who had charge of the affairs of the Khankhanan and his companions obtained leave to go on Sunday, the 17th Urd&imacr;bihi&shbarb;t, in the 7th year. &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan, Razz&amacr;q-bird&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg, and several others of his associates paid their parting salutations on the same day. The Khankhanan was promoted to the rank of 6,000 personal, &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n <pb id=pb222 n=222>to that of 3,000 and horse, that of D&amacr;r&amacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n increased by 500 personal and 300 horse (altogether 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse), and to Ra&hdotb;man-d&amacr;d, his (the Khankhanan&apos;s) younger son, I also gave a fitting mansab. I presented the Khankhanan with a grand dress of honour, a jewelled dagger, a special elephant with <hi>tal&amacr;yir</hi> (accoutrements), and an Iraq horse. In the same way I bestowed on his sons and companions dresses of honour and horses. In the same month Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk came from Kabul with his sons, and had the good fortune to kiss the threshold. &Shbarb;y&amacr;m Singh and R&amacr;y Mangat Bhadauriya, who belonged to the army of Bangash, according to the request of Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, were promoted to higher mansabs. &Shbarb;y&amacr;m Singh had 1,500 personal and was increased by 500, and R&amacr;y Mangat was also raised to a higher rank.

<p>For a long time past news had come of the illness of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n; sometimes the disease was got under and sometimes recurred, until he died at Burhanpur in the 63rd year of his age. His understanding and capacity were very good. He was very quick-witted. He also wrote poetry. He composed &ldquo;&Khbarb;usrau and &Shbarb;&imacr;r&imacr;n,&rdquo; dedicating it to me, and called it the &ldquo;N&umacr;r-n&amacr;ma&rdquo; (the writing of light).<note n=1>The history of N&umacr;r, i.e. the history of N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r.</note> He had been ennobled in the time of my revered father and made Vizier. In the days when I was a prince he had several times done foolish things, and most men, and indeed &Khbarb;usrau himself, were of opinion that after my accession I would do unpleasant things (with regard to him). In a manner contrary to what had entered the minds of himself and others, I favoured him and promoted him to the rank of 5,000 personal and horse, and after he had for some time been Vizier with full authority, neglected no point in increasing favour towards him. After his death I gave mansabs to his sons and bestowed kindnesses on them. At last <pb id=pb223 n=223>it was clear that his disposition and sincerity were not as they should be, and, considering his own evil deeds, he had always been suspicious with regard to me. They say he was aware of the conspiracy and disturbance that took place on the Kabul expedition, and had given support to the wretches. Indeed, I had no confidence that notwithstanding my favour and kindness to him he was not disloyal and of perverse fortune.

<p>After a short space of time, on the 25th of the same month of Urd&imacr;bihi&shbarb;t, the news of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;&apos;s death arrived. The said M&imacr;rz&amacr; was of the ruling family of Thatta (Tatta), of the tribe of Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n&imacr;. His father, M&imacr;rz&amacr; J&amacr;n&imacr;, in the time of my revered father became loyal, and with the Khankhanan, who had been appointed to his province, he had the good fortune to have the honour of waiting on Akbar near Lahore. By the royal favour he was given his own province, and, choosing himself to serve at Court, he sent his men to the charge and administration of Thatta, and remained in the service while he lived. At last he died at Burhanpur. M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, his son, who was at Thatta, in accordance with the firman of the late king obtained the government of that country. Sa&ayin;&imacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was at Bhakar (Bukkur), received an order to console him and bring him to Court. The aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n sent men to him to recommend loyalty to him. At last, having brought him to Agra, he procured him the honour of kissing the feet of my revered father. He was at Agra when my father died and I ascended the throne. After I arrived at Lahore for the pursuit of &Khbarb;usrau news came that the Amirs on the borders of Khurasan had assembled together and proceeded against Qandahar, and that &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg, the governor of that place, was shut up in the fort and looking out for assistance. Of necessity an army was appointed for the relief of Qandahar under the leadership of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; and other Amirs and generals. When this army reached the <pb id=pb224 n=224>neighbourhood of Qandahar, the army of Khurasan, not seeing in themselves the power to await it, returned. M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;, having entered Qandahar, handed over the country and the fort to Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been appointed to the government of the place, and &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg went to his own jagir. M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; started for Lahore by way of Bhakar. Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n was only a short time at Qandahar before he died, and that province was again in need of a leader and master. This time I added Qandahar to Thatta and handed it over to M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;. From that time till his death he remained there continuously in performance of the duties of its protection and government. His conduct towards the disaffected was excellent. As it was necessary to send a leader to Qandahar in the place of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;, I appointed Ab&umacr;-l-b&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg,<note n=1>Should be Ab&umacr;-n-nab&imacr;. See <hi>infra</hi>.</note> who was at Multan and in that neighbourhood, to that post. I promoted him in rank from 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse to 3,000 personal and horse, and honoured him with the title of Bah&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n and a standard. The governorship of Delhi and the protection and administration of that province was conferred on Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n. I dignified R&umacr;p &Khbarb;aw&amacr;&sdotb;&sdotb;, who was one of the personal servants of my revered father, with the title of &Khbarb;aw&amacr;&sdotb;&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and, giving him the rank of 1,000 personal and 500 horse, bestowed on him the faujd&amacr;rship of the Sarkar of Qanuj. As I had sought the daughter<note n=2>This was Arjumand B&amacr;n&umacr; or Mumt&amacr;z-ma&hdotb;all, the favourite wife of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n and the mother of fourteen of his children. She was the niece of N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n, her father being N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n&apos;s brother, the &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n IV and Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan of Beale, who also had the names of I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n and Yam&imacr;nu-d-daulah. There is an account of the betrothal and wedding in the P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h-n&amacr;ma, i, 388. It seems that the betrothal took place five years and three months before the marriage, and when &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n was 15 years old. At the time of the marriage &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n was <pb>20 years and 3 months old and Arjumand B&amacr;n&umacr; was 19 years and 1 month. 18th &Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;d, 1021, would correspond to about the end of May, 1612, but the P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h-n&amacr;ma gives the eve of Friday, 9th Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal of 1021, corresponding to 22nd Urd&imacr;bihi&shbarb;t, as the day of the marriage. This would correspond to 30th April, 1612, so that apparently Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s visit to the house (apparently I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah&apos;s, but possibly &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n&apos;s) took place about a month after the marriage. Arjumand B&amacr;n&umacr; died in childbed at Burhanpur in 1040, or July, 1631, the chronogram being one word, viz. <hi>&ghbarb;am</hi>, &lsquo;grief.&rsquo; She must have been born in 1591, and was in her 40th year when she died. She was not &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n&apos;s first wife, for he was married to the daughter of Mu&zumlb;affar &Hdotb;usain &Sdotb;afaw&imacr;, a descendant of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Isma&ayin;&imacr;l of Persia, in September, 1610 (Rajab, 1019), but the betrothal to Arjumand was earlier than this. It was in Arjumand&apos;s honour that the T&amacr;j was built.</note> of I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah, in marriage for &Khbarb;urram, and the marriage <pb id=pb225 n=225>festival had been arranged for, I went on Thursday, 18th &Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;d, to his house, and stayed there one day and one night. He (&Khbarb;urram) presented offerings (to me) and he gave jewels<note n=1><hi>T&umacr;rh&amacr;.</hi> The corresponding passage in the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 67, last line, shows that jewels are meant. The text omits the preposition <hi>ba</hi> before <hi>Begam&amacr;n</hi>.</note> to the Begams, and to his mothers (including stepmothers) and to the female servants of the harem, and dresses of honour to the Amirs.

<p>I sent &ayin;Abdu-r-Razz&amacr;q, the bakhshi of the palace (<hi>dar&khbarb;&amacr;na</hi>), to settle the country of Thatta (Sind) until a Sardar should be appointed who could conciliate the soldiery and the cultivators, and so bring the province into order. I increased his rank and presented him with an elephant and a shawl (<hi>parmnarm</hi>), and sent him off. I made Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk bakhshi in his room. &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n, who had been sent to inspect the buildings in Lahore and to arrange about them, came in the end of this month and waited on me. M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;&Imacr;s&amacr; Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n, one of the relations of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;, had been appointed to the army of the Deccan. I sent for him to arrange about the business of Thatta, and on the same day he had the good fortune to pay his respects. As he was deserving of favour, he was given the rank of 1,000 personal and 500 horse. The disease <pb id=pb226 n=226>of <hi>&khbarb;&umacr;n-p&amacr;ra</hi><note n=1><hi>&Khbarb;&umacr;n-p&amacr;ra</hi>, &lsquo;congestion of blood&rsquo;; <hi>p&amacr;ra</hi> or <hi>b&amacr;ra</hi> is used to mean a collection or gathering. See Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, ii, 221, where we have <hi>b&amacr;ra ya&ayin;n&imacr; jam&ayin;&imacr;</hi>. Erskine, in spite of his MS., reads <hi>ch&umacr;n p&amacr;ra</hi> and translates &lsquo;as quicksilver.&rsquo;</note> had affected my health. By the advice of the physicians on Wednesday, the (date not given) of the said month, I drew about a sir (<hi>&amacr;&sumlb;&amacr;r</hi>)<note n=2><hi>&Amacr;&sumlb;&amacr;r</hi>, which, according to Forbes, is a sir weight.</note> of blood from my left arm. As great lightness resulted, it occurred to me that if they were to call blood-letting &lsquo;lightening&rsquo; it would be well. Nowadays this expression is made use of. To Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had bled me, I gave a jewelled <hi>khapwa</hi> (dagger). Ki&shbarb;an D&amacr;s, accountant of the elephant department and stable, who from the time of the late king until now has been the clerk in charge of two departments, and for ages had been hopeful of the title of Raja and the rank of 1,000 personal, and before this had been gratified with a title, now had the rank of 1,000 conferred on him. M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam, son of Sult&amacr;n &Hdotb;usain M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Sdotb;afaw&imacr;, who had been appointed to the army of the Deccan, I sent for at his request. On Saturday, the 9th of the month of T&imacr;r, he came with his sons and waited on me. He made an offering of a ruby and forty-six royal pearls. I increased the rank of T&amacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor of Bhakar, who was one of the old Amirs of this State, by 500 personal and horse.

<p>The tale of the death of &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n is a very strange affair. After he had performed such services and Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n had given him leave to go to the Sarkar of Orissa, one night on the road he was riding on a female elephant <hi>chaukand&imacr;-d&amacr;r</hi><note n=3>Perhaps it was only what is called a <hi>ch&amacr;r-j&amacr;ma</hi> and not an enclosed howdah.</note> (? in a square howdah or four-pillared canopy), and had given a young eunuch a place behind him<corr sic=",">.</corr> When he left his camp they had <pb id=pb227 n=227>fastened up an elephant that was in heat on the road. From the noise of the horses&apos; hoofs and the movement of the horsemen he attempted to break his chain. On this account a great noise and confusion took place. When this noise reached the ear of the eunuch, he in a state of bewilderment awoke &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was asleep or in the insensibility of wine, and said: &ldquo;An elephant in heat has got loose and is coming in this direction.&rdquo; As soon as he heard this he became confused and threw himself down from the front of the chaukandi. When he threw himself off his toe struck against a stone and was torn open, and he died in two or three days of that same wound. In short, from hearing this affair I was completely bewildered. That a brave man on the mere hearing of a cry or a word coming from a child should become so confused and throw himself down without control from the top of an elephant is in truth a matter of amazement. The news of this event reached me on the 19th of the month of T&imacr;r. I consoled his sons with kindnesses and the conferring of offices. If this accident had not happened to him, as he had done notable service, he would have obtained exaltation with greater favours and kindnesses.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;One cannot strive against destiny.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n had sent 160 male and female elephants from Bengal; they were brought before me and placed in my private elephant stables. R&amacr;ja Tekchand, the Raja of Kumaon, asked for leave to depart. As in the time of my father there had been given to his father 100 horses, I gave him the same number as well as an elephant, and while he was at Court bestowed on him dresses of honour and a jewelled dagger. Also to his brothers I gave dresses of honour and horses. I presented him with his territory according to previous arrangements, and he went back to his home happy and successful.

<pb id=pb228 n=228><p>It happened incidentally that this verse of the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; was quoted:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Pass, O Messiah, o&apos;er the heads of us slain by love;
    <l>Thy restoring one life is worth a hundred murders.&rdquo;<note n=1>The reference is to the Messiah as the restorer to life by His breath. For <hi>bagu&zbarb;ar</hi>, &lsquo;pass by,&rsquo; Erskine had in his MS. <hi>magu&zbarb;ar</hi>, &lsquo;pass not.&rsquo; Apparently the verse means that it is more meritorious for the Messiah to restore one man to life than it is for another to slay a hundred infidels.</note>
</lg>


<p>As I have a poetical disposition I sometimes intentionally and sometimes involuntarily compose couplets and quatrains. So the following couplet came into my head:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Turn not thy cheek, without thee I cannot live a moment;
    <l>For thee to break one heart is equal a hundred murders.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>When I had recited this, everyone who had a poetical vein composed a couplet in the same mode. Mull&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; A&hdotb;mad,<note n=2>&ayin;Al&imacr; A&hdotb;mad died suddenly two years before this, unless indeed the passage at p. 169 refers to the mimic and not to &ayin;Al&imacr; A&hdotb;mad. Probably the meaning is that &ayin;Al&imacr; A&hdotb;mad had made this couplet on some previous occasion, and that one of the courtiers now quoted it. His verse about the hundred murders may contain a play on the word <hi>&khbarb;&umacr;n</hi>, &lsquo;blood,&rsquo; and refer to the spilling of the blood-like wine. It is difficult to understand how Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r came to introduce the verse into his Memoirs here. It does not seem to have any connection with the account of the Raja of Kumaon. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r says it was quoted &lsquo;incidentally,&rsquo; <hi>b&amacr; taqarrub&imacr;</hi>. Perhaps the word here means &lsquo;by way of parody,&rsquo; or &lsquo;by way of paraphrase.&rsquo; In the MS. used by Erskine the words of the first line seem to be <hi>Magu&zbarb;ar Mas&imacr;&hdotb; bar sar-i-m&amacr;</hi>, and so Erskine translates &ldquo;Pass not, O Messiah, over the heads of us victims of love.&rdquo; Perhaps <hi>magu&zbarb;ar</hi> means &lsquo;do not pass by.&rsquo;</note> the seal-engraver, of whom an account has been given previously, had not said badly&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;O Censor, fear the weeping of the old vintner;
    <l>Thy breaking one jar is equal to a hundred murders.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>Ab&umacr;-l-fat&hdotb; Dakhan&imacr;,<note n=3>This is the Dakhan&imacr; chief mentioned previously at p. 192.</note> who was one of the most considerable of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s Amirs, and had two years previously taken to being loyal and had entered himself among the leaders of the victorious army, on the 10th <pb id=pb229 n=229>of Amurd&amacr;d waited on me, and being accepted by my grace and favour had bestowed on him a special sword and a robe of honour, and after some days I also gave him a special horse. &Khbarb;w&amacr;jag&imacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain,<note n=1>Blochmann, p. 485. He acted in Kashmir for his brother H&amacr;&shbarb;im.</note> who had gone to Kashmir as the deputy for his brother&apos;s son, when he was satisfied in his mind with the state of affairs of that place, came on the same day and waited on me. As a Sardar was needed to be sent for the governorship of Patna and the rule of that place, it occurred to me to send M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam. Having raised his rank from 5,000 personal and 1,500 horse to 5,000 personal and horse, on the 26th Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-&sumlb;-&sumlb;&amacr;n&imacr;, corresponding to the 2nd &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war, I gave him the government of Patna, and bestowing on him a special elephant, a horse with a jewelled saddle, a jewelled sword, and a superb dress of honour, I dismissed him. His sons and the sons of his brother Muzaffar &Hdotb;usain &Khbarb;&amacr;n M&imacr;rz&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; were exalted with increased rank, elephants, horses, and dresses of honour, and sent off with him. I appointed R&amacr;y Dul&imacr;p to support M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam. As his residence was near that place, he collected a good body of men for that service. I increased his rank by 500 personal and horse, so that it became 2,000 with 1,000 horse, and also gave him an elephant. Ab&umacr;-l-fat&hdotb; Dakhan&imacr; had obtained a jagir in the Sarkar of Nagpur and that neighbourhood. He was dismissed in order that he might administer his jagir and look to the guarding and government of that country as well. &Khbarb;usrau B&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg was appointed to the faujd&amacr;rship of the Sarkar of Mewar. His rank of 800 personal and 300 horse was now increased to 1,000 personal and 500 horse, and I also presented him with a horse. As I had my eye on the old service of Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n, it occurred to me that I must not pass by the desire of his heart. I had <pb id=pb230 n=230>increased his rank and he had obtained good jagirs, but he longed for a standard and drums, and he was now honoured with these as well. &Sdotb;&amacr;li&hdotb;, the adopted son of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Beg-M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Sdotb;afaw&imacr;, was a youth of great bravery and zeal. I gave him the title of &Khbarb;anjar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and made him eager in the service.

<p>On Thursday, the 22nd &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war, corresponding with 17th Rajab, 1021, the feast of my solar weighing took place in the house of Maryam-zam&amacr;n&imacr;. It is an approved custom with me to weigh myself in this manner. The late king Akbar, who was the place of manifestation of kindness and grace, also approved of the custom, and twice in every year weighed himself against several sorts of metals, gold, silver, and many precious articles, once according to the solar and once according to the lunar year, and divided their total value, which was worth about a lakh of rupees, among faqirs and needy people. I also observe this annual custom and weigh myself in the same manner, and give those valuables to faqirs. Mu&ayin;taqid &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Diwan of Bengal, who had been relieved from that service, produced before me the sons and brothers and some of the servants of &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n, whom Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n had sent with him to the Court. The charge of each one of the Afghans was entrusted to a responsible servant. Then he (Mu&ayin;taqid) produced his own offering, which consisted of twenty-five elephants, two rubies, a jewelled <hi>ph&umacr;l ka&tdotb;&amacr;ra</hi><note n=1>The <hi>ka&tdotb;&amacr;ra</hi> was a long, narrow dagger. See Blochmann&apos;s &Amacr;y&imacr;n, pl. xli, fig. 9. But the word <hi>ph&umacr;l</hi> (flower) is obscure. Perhaps it means the knot or crochet of jewels called by Chardin, iv, 164, ed. Rouen, &ldquo;une enseigne ronde de pierreries,&rdquo; and which, he says, the Persians called &lsquo;rose de Poignard.&rsquo;</note> (a kind of dagger), trustworthy eunuchs, Bengal stuffs, etc. M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n, son of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, who was in the Deccan army, obtained the honour of kissing the threshold and gave a ruby as an offering. As between Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, leader of the army of Banga&shbarb; <pb id=pb231 n=231>on the borders of Kabul, and the Amirs of that Subah who had been sent as companions to him under his leadership, there were quarrels, especially with &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n, I sent &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n to make enquiry as to which side was in fault. On the 11th of the month of Mihr, Mu&ayin;taqid &Khbarb;&amacr;n was appointed to the high dignity of bakhshi, and his mansab was raised to 1,000 personal and 300 horse. Raising for the second time the mansabs of Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n a little, I made it 2,500 personal and 1,500 horse by an increase of 500. On the representation of the Khankhanan, Far&imacr;d&umacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Barl&amacr;s was raised to the mansab, original and increase, of 2,500 personal and 2,000 horse. R&amacr;y Manohar received that of 1,000 personal and 800 horse, and R&amacr;ja B&imacr;r Singh Deo that of 4,000 personal and 2,200 horse. Bh&amacr;rat, grandson of R&amacr;mchand Band&imacr;lah, I, after the latter&apos;s death, honoured with the title of Raja. On the 28th &Amacr;b&amacr;n, Zafar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, having come according to summons from the Subah of Gujarat, waited on me. He brought as offerings a ruby and three pearls. On the 6th &Amacr;&zbarb;ar, corresponding with the 3rd &Shbarb;aww&amacr;l, news came from Burhanpur that the Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr; had died on Sunday, the 27th &Amacr;b&amacr;n, in the parganah of Nih&amacr;lp&umacr;r. After the illness he had at Lahore his intelligence appeared to be less, and a great loss of memory happened to him. He was very sincere. It is sad that he left no son capable of patronage and favour. Ch&imacr;n Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n came from his father, who was at Peshawar, on the 20th &Amacr;&zbarb;ar, and offered (on his father&apos;s behalf) 100 muhrs and 100 rupees, and also presented the offerings he had of his own in the shape of a horse and cloth stuffs and other things. To the government of Behar I promoted Zafar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who is one of the trustworthy house-born ones and foster-children, and increasing his mansab by 500 personal and horse, I made it up to 3,000 personal and 2,000 horse, and also honouring his brothers with robes of honour and horses, <pb id=pb232 n=232>allowed them to go off to that province. He had always hoped that he might obtain some separate service in order that he might show his natural ability. I also desired to prove him and make this service the touchstone by which to try him. As it was the season for travelling and hunting, on Tuesday, the 2nd &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da (25th December, 1612), corresponding with the 4th Day, I left Agra with the intention of hunting and encamped in the Dahrah garden, remaining there four days.<note n=1>He must have remained more than four days, for he got the news of Sal&imacr;ma&apos;s death while in the garden. See <hi>infra</hi>. Perhaps the date 10th refers to Day and not to <corr sic="&Zbarb;&imacr;-qa&ayin;da">&Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da</corr>. The Dahrah garden was in the environs of Agra.</note> On the 10th of the same month the news came of the death of Sal&imacr;ma Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Begam, who had been ill in the city. Her mother was Gul-ru&khbarb; Begam, daughter of King B&amacr;bar, and her father M&imacr;rz&amacr; N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad, of the Naq&shbarb;band&imacr; &Khbarb;w&amacr;jas. She was adorned with all good qualities. In women this degree of skill and capacity is seldom found. H.M. Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n, by way of kindness (to Bair&amacr;m), had betrothed her who was his sister&apos;s daughter to Bair&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n. After his death, in the beginning of the reign of the late king Akbar, the marriage took place. After the said <corr sic=Khan>&Khbarb;&amacr;n</corr> had been killed, my revered father married her himself. She received mercy (died) in the 60th year of her age.<note n=2>This statement is wrong. Sal&imacr;ma was 76 when she died, she having been born on 4th &Shbarb;aww&amacr;l, 945, or 23rd February, 1539. She died on or about 10th &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da, 1021 (2nd January, 1613), so that she was 73 solar years old. See note in B.M. MS. Or. 171, Rieu, 257<hi>a</hi>, and an article in J.A.S.B. for 1906. The note is by the author of the T&amacr;r&imacr;&khbarb;-i-Mu&hdotb;ammad&imacr; and is at 72<hi>a</hi> of the B.M. MS. Or. 171, and the corresponding passage appears in MS. Or. 182, on p. 140. The chronogram of Sal&imacr;ma&apos;s birth was <hi>&Khbarb;&umacr;&shbarb;-&hdotb;&amacr;l</hi>, which yields 945. She was about 3&frac12; years older than Akbar.</note> On the same day I marched from the Dahrah garden and sent I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah to bury her (lit. lift her up), and ordered him to place her in the building in the Mand&amacr;kar <pb id=pb233 n=233>garden which she herself had made. On the 17th of the month of Day, M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; Beg Akbar&shbarb;&amacr;h&imacr; came from the army of the Deccan and waited on me. &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n, whom I had despatched to the Subah of Kabul, returned on the 21st of the same month and waited on me. The time for his going and coming had extended to three months and eleven days. He brought twelve muhrs and twelve rupees as an offering. On the same day R&amacr;ja R&amacr;m D&amacr;s also came from the victorious army of the Deccan and paid his respects, and made an offering of 101 muhrs. As robes of honour for the winter season had not been sent to the Amirs of the Deccan, they were forwarded by the hand of &Hdotb;ay&amacr;t &Khbarb;&amacr;n. As the port of Surat had been assigned in jagir to Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, he prayed that Ch&imacr;n Qil&imacr;j (his son) might be despatched for its guardianship and administration. On the 27th Day he had a dress of honour, and being honoured with a dress of honour and the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and a standard, obtained leave to go. For the purpose of advising the Amirs of Kabul, and on account of the disagreements that had sprung up between them and Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, I sent R&amacr;ja R&amacr;m D&amacr;s, and bestowed on him a horse and robe of honour and 30,000 rupees for expenses. On the 6th Bahman, when my camp was in the parganah of B&amacr;r&imacr;, there came the news of the death of &Khbarb;w&amacr;jag&imacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain, who was of the ancient servants of this State. His elder brother, Mu&hdotb;ammad Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, in the time of my revered father, found great favour, and &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain as well was one of his confidential servants, and held employments such as that of superintendent of the kitchen (<hi>bak&amacr;wul</hi>) and such like. He left no son and was beardless, and not a single hair of moustache or whiskers appeared on him. At the time of speaking he spoke very shrilly, and was looked upon as an eunuch. &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, whom the Khankhanan had sent from Burhanpur to make certain representations, <pb id=pb234 n=234>came on the 15th of the same month and waited on me. He presented 100 muhrs and 100 rupees. As the affairs of the Deccan, in consequence of the hasty proceedings of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n and the treachery of the Amirs, did not present a good prospect, the Dakhanis obtained an opportunity for speaking and began to talk of peace to the Amirs and well-wishers there. &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n embraced the robe of loyalty, and prayed that if the affairs of the Deccan were entrusted to him he would so arrange that some of the districts which had been taken out of the possession of the officers of the State should be restored. The loyal ones, looking to the necessities of the time, represented this, and a settlement of some kind was arrived at, and the Khankhanan undertook to settle matters. The &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am was also desirous of putting down the rebel R&amacr;n&amacr;, and begged for this service by way of obtaining merit (as a <hi>&ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;</hi>). He was ordered to go to Malwa, which was his jagir, and after arranging matters there to take up this duty. The mansab of Ab&umacr;-l-b&imacr; Uzbeg<note n=1>The real name appears to be Ab&umacr;-n-nab&imacr;. He had the title of Bah&amacr;dur &Khbarb;&amacr;n. See Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, i, 400. In the Akbar-n&amacr;ma, iii, 820 and 839, he is called <corr sic="Ab&umacr;-l-baq&amacr;">Ab&umacr;-l-Baq&amacr;</corr>.</note> was increased by 1,000 personal and 500 horse to 4,000 personal and 3,500 horse. My hunting went on for 2 months and 20 days, and during that time I went out every day to hunt. As not more than 50 or 60 days remained before the world-illumining New Year, I returned, and on the 24th Isfandiy&amacr;r encamped in the Dahrah garden. The courtiers and some of the mansabdars, who by order had remained in the city, came on that day and waited on me. Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n presented a decorated jar, Frank hats, and a jewelled sparrow (?). I remained three days in the garden, and on the 27th Isfandiy&amacr;r entered the city. During this time<note n=2>This must refer to the 2 months and 20 days of hunting.</note> 223 head of deer, etc., 95 nilgaw, 2 boars, 36 cranes (or herons), etc., and 1,457 fish were killed.




<pb id=pb235 n=235>
<div1 id=yr8>
<head>The Eighth New Year after the auspicious Accession.</head>


<p>The eighth year after my accession, corresponding with Mu&hdotb;arram, 1022. On the night of Thursday, the 27th Mu&hdotb;arram, corresponding with the 1st Farward&imacr;n in the eighth year after my accession, after 3&frac12; gharis of day had elapsed, his honour the sun passed from the constellation of Pisces to that of Aries, which is his abode of rejoicing and victory. Early in the morning of the New Year&apos;s Day the feast was prepared and adorned after the custom of every year. At the end of that day I sat on the throne of State, and the Amirs and ministers of the State and the courtiers of the palace came to salute and congratulate me. On these days of happy augury I sat the whole day in the public audience hall. Those who had anything to ask or claim presented their petitions, and the offerings of the servants of the palace were laid before me. Ab&umacr;-l-b&imacr;, governor of Qandahar, had sent for an offering Iraq horses and hunting dogs, and they were brought before me. On the 9th of the same month Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n came from the Subah of Behar, and in waiting on me presented 100 muhrs and 100 rupees, as well as an elephant. On the 12th the offering of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah was laid before me, consisting of jewels, cloths, and other things. That which pleased me attained to the dignity of acceptance. Of the elephants of Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s offering ten others were inspected on this day. On the 13th the offerings of Tarbiyat &Khbarb;&amacr;n were laid before me. Mu&ayin;taqid &Khbarb;&amacr;n bought a house at Agra, and passed some days in that place. Misfortunes happened to him one after another. We have heard that prosperity and bad luck depend on four things: first, upon your wife; second, upon your slave; third upon your house; fourth, upon your horse. In order to know the prosperity or ill-luck of a house a rule has been established, indeed they <pb id=pb236 n=236>say it is infallible. One must clear a small piece of the site from earth, and again strew the earth upon the same ground. If it cover it, one may call it middling good fortune for that house, neither prosperity nor misfortune; if it become less (i.e. does not cover it exactly) it points to ill-luck, and if it does more (than cover it) it is fortunate and auspicious. On the 14th the mansab of I&ayin;tib&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n was raised from 1,000 and 300 horse to 2,000 personal and 500 horse. I increased the mansab of Tarbiyat &Khbarb;&amacr;n by 500 personal and 50 horse, so that it became 2,000 personal and 850 horse. H&umacr;&shbarb;ang, son of Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was in Bengal with his father, came at this time and paid his respects. He brought with him some Maghs, whose country is near Pegu and Arracan, and the country is still in their possession. I made some enquiries as to their customs and religion. Briefly they are animals in the form of men. They eat everything there is either on land or in the sea, and nothing is forbidden by their religion. They eat with anyone. They take into their possession (marry) their sisters by another mother. In face they are like the Qar&amacr; Qalm&amacr;qs, but their language is that of Tibet and quite unlike Turk&imacr;. There is a range of mountains, one end of which touches the province of K&amacr;&shbarb;&ghbarb;ar and the other the country of Pegu. They have no proper religion or any customs that can be interpreted as religion. They are far from the Musulman faith and separated from that of the Hindus.

<p>Two or three days before the &Shbarb;araf (the sun&apos;s highest point) my son &Khbarb;urram desired me to go to his house that he might present his New Year&apos;s offerings from that place. I agreed to his request, and remained for one day and one night at his house. He presented his offerings. I took what I approved of and gave him back the rest. The next day Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n presented his offerings. Every day until the day of culmination (<hi>r&umacr;z-i-&shbarb;araf</hi>) the offerings of one or of two or three of the Amirs were laid before me. <pb id=pb237 n=237>On Monday, the 19th Farward&imacr;n, the assembly of the &Shbarb;araf was held. On that auspicious day I sat on the throne of State, and an order was given that they should produce all sorts of intoxicating things, such as wine, etc., so that every one according to his desire might take what he liked. Many took wine. The offerings of Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n were on this day brought to me. I gave one gold muhr of 1,000 tolas, which is called the star of destiny (<hi>kaukab-i-&tumlb;&amacr;li&ayin;</hi>), to Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the ambassador of the ruler of Iran. The feast went off well. After the assembly broke up I ordered that they might carry off the furniture and decorations. The offering of the Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n had not been arranged on New Year&apos;s Day. All sorts of rareties and excellent presents were now produced which he had collected together. Amongst others, twelve Iraq and Arab horses that had been brought in a ship, and jewelled saddles of Frank workmanship<note n=1><hi>Z&imacr;n-i-mura&sdotb;&sdotb;a&ayin; k&amacr;r&imacr;-i-Farang&imacr;.</hi> The MSS. in the B.M. seem to have <hi>zaram</hi> instead of <hi>z&imacr;n</hi>.</note> were produced before me. To the mansab of Naw&amacr;zi&shbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n 500 horse were added so as to make it one of 2,000 personal and horse. An elephant called Bans&imacr;badan, which Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n had sent from Bengal, was brought to me and put among my special elephants. On the 3rd Urd&imacr;bihi&shbarb;t, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r, brother of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, came from Gujarat and waited on me; he offered 100 Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; muhrs. After he had been in attendance a few days he was honoured with the title of Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n. As a competent bakhshi had to be sent to the army of Banga&shbarb; and those regions, I chose Mu&ayin;taqid &Khbarb;&amacr;n for this duty, and increased his mansab by 300 personal and 50 horse so that it became 1,500 with 350 horse, and dismissed him. It was settled that he must go quickly. I sent off Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain Cheleb&imacr;, who understood the purchase of jewels and collecting curiosities, with money to go by <pb id=pb238 n=238>way of Iraq to Constantinople and buy and bring for the Sarkar curiosities and rareties. For this purpose it was necessary that he should pay his respects to the ruler of Iran. I had given him a letter and a memorandum (of what he was to procure). Briefly, he saw my brother, &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s, in Mashhad, and the king enquired from him what kind of things should be brought for his master&apos;s Sarkar. As he was urgent, Cheleb&imacr; showed the list he had brought with him. In that list there were entered good turquoise and <hi>m&umacr;m&imacr;y&amacr;</hi> (bitumen) from the mine of Ispahan. He told him that these two articles were not to be bought, but he would send them for me. He authorized Uwais&imacr; T&umacr;pch&imacr; (gunner), who was one of his private servants, to hand over to him six bags (<hi>amb&amacr;ncha</hi>) of turquoise earth holding about 30 seers, with 14 tolas of mumiya and four Iraq horses, one of which was a piebald, and he wrote a letter containing many, many expressions of friendship. With regard to the inferior quality of the turquoise dust (<hi>&khbarb;&amacr;ka</hi>) and the small quantity of mumiya he made many apologies. The khaka appeared very inferior. Although the jewellers and makers of rings made every endeavour, no stone that was fit to be made into a finger ring could be produced. Probably in these days turquoise dust is not procurable from the mines such as it was in the time of the late king &Tumlb;ahm&amacr;sp. He mentioned all this in the letter. With regard to the effect of mumiya I had heard much from scientists, but when I tried it no result was apparent. I do not know whether physicians have exaggerated its effect, or whether its efficacy had been lessened by its being stale. At any rate, I gave it to a fowl with a broken leg to drink in larger quantity than they said and in the manner laid down by the physicians, and rubbed some on the place where it was broken, and kept it there for three days, though it was said to be sufficient to keep it from morning till evening. But after I had examined it, no effect was produced, and <pb id=pb239 n=239>the broken place remained as it was.<note n=1>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s words seem to imply that he caused the fowl&apos;s leg to be broken in order to try the experiment. Manucci, i, 55, has a good deal to say about <hi>m&umacr;m&imacr;y&amacr;</hi>, though he admits that he had not himself witnessed its effects. I do not find that &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr; B&amacr;b&amacr; descants on its virtues, though at the end of the first chapter he says that his mother gave him an unguent which she said would cure all fractures. The Persian translator, no doubt rightly, has rendered the word &lsquo;unguent&rsquo; by <hi>m&umacr;m&imacr;y&amacr;</hi>. With regard to the derivation of the word, may it not be connected with <hi>mom</hi>, &lsquo;wax&rsquo;? Vullers has a long article on the word.</note> In a separate letter the Shah had written a recommendation of Sal&amacr;mu-llah, the Arab. I immediately increased his mansab and his jagir.

<p>I sent one of my private elephants with trappings to &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n and gave another to Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n. I ordered that assignments (<hi>tan&khbarb;w&amacr;h</hi>) should be made to 12,000 horse on the establishment<note n=2>The text has <hi>bir&amacr;d&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;brotherhood,&rsquo; but the true reading, as shown by the B.M. MSS., is <hi>bar &amacr;ward&imacr;</hi>, <AR>br 'AUrdI</AR>, and this means either the establishment of &ayin;Abdu-llah or a list submitted by him. Perhaps &lsquo;list&rsquo; is a better translation, the word <hi>&amacr;ward&imacr;</hi> being connected with the <hi>&amacr;warda-naw&imacr;s</hi> of Wilson&apos;s Glossary.</note> of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n at the rate of three horses and two horses for each trooper. As previously with a view to service in Junagarh I had increased the mansab of his brother Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n by 500 personal and 300 horse, and had afterwards assigned the duty to K&amacr;mil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, I ordered that he should retain his increase and that it should be counted (permanently) in his mansab. I increased the rank of Sarfar&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which was that of 1,500 personal and 500 horse, by 200 horse more. On the 27th Urd&imacr;bihi&shbarb;t, corresponding with the 26th Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal, in the eighth year of my reign, in the year 1022 of the Hijra era, on Thursday, the meeting for my lunar weighing took place in the house of Maryam-zam&amacr;n&imacr; (his mother). Some of the money that was weighed I ordered to be given to the women and the deserving ones who had assembled in my mother&apos;s house. On the same day I increased by 1,000 the mansab of Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, so that it came to 6,000 personal and 5,000 <pb id=pb240 n=240>horse. &Khbarb;usrau Beg, a slave of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, came from Patna in the company of &ayin;Abdu-r-Razz&amacr;q Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r&imacr; and waited on me, and Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, brother of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, obtained leave to go to Ahmadabad. An Afghan had brought from the Carnatic two goats that had <hi>p&amacr;zahar</hi> (bezoar stones, an antidote against poison). I had always heard that an animal that has pazahar is very thin and miserable, but these goats were very fat and fresh. I ordered them to kill one of them, which was a female. Four pazahar stones became apparent, and this caused great astonishment.

<p>It is an established fact that cheetahs in unaccustomed places do not pair off with a female, for my revered father once collected together 1,000 cheetahs. He was very desirous that they should pair, but this in no way came off. He had many times coupled male and female cheetahs together in gardens, but there, too, it did not come off. At this time a male cheetah, having slipped its collar, went to a female and paired with it, and after two and a half months three young ones were born and grew up. This has been recorded because it appeared strange. As cheetahs did not pair with cheetahs, (still less) had it ever been heard in former times(?) that tigers mated in captivity. As in the time of my reign wild beasts have abandoned their savagery, tigers have become so tame that troops of them without chains or restraint go about amongst the people, and they neither harm men nor have any wildness or alarm. It happened that a tigress became pregnant and after three months bore three cubs; it had never happened that a wild tiger after its capture had paired. It had been heard from philosophers that the milk of a tigress was of great use for brightening eyes. Although we made every effort that the moisture of milk should appear in her breasts, we could not accomplish it. It occurs to me that as it is a raging creature, and milk appears in the breasts of mothers by reason of the affection they have for their <pb id=pb241 n=241>young, as milk<note n=1>The sentence is very obscure. MS. No. 181 I.O. has <hi>&khbarb;&umacr;n</hi>, &lsquo;blood,&rsquo; instead of <hi>ch&umacr;n</hi>, &lsquo;as,&rsquo; and perhaps the meaning is blood in the breasts turns to milk on account of love for their cubs, and then the sucking by the latter increases the mother&apos;s natural ferocity and the milk dries up.</note> comes into their breasts in connection with their young ones drinking and sucking at the time of their taking (the milk), their (the mothers&apos;) rage increases and the milk in their breasts is dried up.

<p>At the end of Urd&imacr;bihi&shbarb;t, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Q&amacr;sim, brother of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &ayin;Abdu-l-&ayin;Az&imacr;z, who is of the Naq&shbarb;band&imacr; &Khbarb;w&amacr;jas, came from M&amacr;war&amacr;&hamza;a-n-nahr and waited on me. After a few days 12,000 rupees were given to him as a present. As &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n had made a melon-bed in the neighbourhood of the city, when two watches of day had passed on Thursday, the 10th &Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;d, I got into a boat and went to inspect the melon-bed, and took the ladies with me. We reached there when two or three gharis of day were left, and passed the evening in walking among the beds. A wonderfully sharp wind and whirlwind sprang up, so that the tents and screens fell down. I got into the boat and passed the night in it. I also passed part of the Friday in walking about the melon-bed, and returned to the city. Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who for a long time had been afflicted with boils and other sores, died on the 10th &Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;d. I transferred the jagir and hereditary land of R&amacr;ja Jagman, who had failed in his service in the Deccan, to Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n. &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; P&imacr;r, who is one of the emancipated ones who hold aloof from the attachments of the age, and who on account of the pure friendship that he bears towards me has chosen to be my companion and servant, had before this founded a mosque in the parganah of Mairtha, which is his native place. At this time he took occasion to mention the circumstance. As I found his mind bent on the completion of this building I gave him 4,000 rupees, so that he himself might go and expend it, and also gave him a valuable <pb id=pb242 n=242>shawl and dismissed him. In the public audience hall there were two railings (<hi>ma&hdotb;jar</hi>) of wood. Inside the first, Amirs, ambassadors, and people of honour sat, and no one entered this circle without an order. Within the second railing, which is broader than the first, the mansabdars of inferior rank,<note n=1>In the B.M. MSS. the words are <hi>man&sdotb;abd&amacr;r&amacr;n-i-r&imacr;z&amacr;-man&sdotb;ab</hi>. These last two words are wanting in the text.</note> ahadis, and those who had work to do are admitted. Outside this railing stand the servants of the Amirs and all the people who may enter the Diwankhana. As there was no difference between the first and second railings, it occurred to me that I should decorate the first with silver. I ordered this railing and the staircase that led from this railing to the balcony of the Jharokha, as well as the two elephants placed on the two sides of the seat of the Jharokha, which skilful people had made of wood, to be decorated with silver. After this was completed it was reported to me that 125 maunds of silver in Hindustani weight, equal to 880 maunds of Persia, had been used up; indeed, it now assumed a worthy appearance.

<p>On the 3rd of the month of T&imacr;r, Mu&zumlb;affar &Khbarb;&amacr;n came from Thatta<note n=2>Text Patna, but B.M. MSS. have Thatta.</note> and waited on me. He made an offering of twelve muhrs and a Koran with a jewelled cover, and two jewelled roses(?) (<hi>d&umacr; gul</hi>). On the 14th of the same month &Sdotb;afdar &Khbarb;&amacr;n came from the Subah of Behar and waited on me, offering 101 muhrs. After Mu&zumlb;affar &Khbarb;&amacr;n had been some days in attendance, I increased his former mansab by 500 personal, and giving him a standard and a private shawl dismissed him to Thatta.<note n=3>Text has Patna.</note>

<p>I knew that every animal or living thing bitten by a mad dog died, but this had not been ascertained in <pb id=pb243 n=243>the case of an elephant. In my time it so happened that one night a mad dog came into the place where was tied one of my private elephants, Gajpat&imacr;<note n=1>Text Kachh&imacr;, but it is Gajpat&imacr; in B.M. MSS.</note> by name, and bit the foot of a female elephant that was with mine. She at once cried out. The elephant-keepers at once ran in, and the dog fled away into a thorn-brake that is there. After a little while it came in again and bit my private elephant&apos;s fore-foot as well. The elephant killed it. When a month and five days had passed after this event, one day when it was cloudy the growling of thunder came to the ear of the female elephant, that was in the act of eating, and it of a sudden raised a cry and its limbs began to tremble. It threw itself on the ground, but rose again. For seven days water ran out of its mouth, then suddenly it uttered a cry and showed distress. The remedies the drivers gave it had no effect, and on the eighth day it fell and died. A month after the death of the female elephant they took the large elephant to the edge of the river in the plain. It was cloudy and thundery in the same way. The said elephant in the height of excitement all at once began to tremble and sat down on the ground. With a thousand difficulties the drivers took it to its own place. After the same interval and in the same way that had happened to the female elephant this elephant also died. Great amazement was caused by this affair, and in truth it is a matter to be wondered at that an animal of such size and bulk should be so much affected by a little wound inflicted on it by such a weak creature.

<p>As &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;nan had repeatedly begged for leave to be given to his son &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, on the 4th Amurd&amacr;d I gave him a horse and a robe of honour and dismissed him to the Deccan. I promoted Ya&ayin;q&umacr;b Bada&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;, whose <pb id=pb244 n=244>mansab was 150, to 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse, on account of the bravery he had displayed, and gave him the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n as well as a standard.

<p>The Hindus are in four divisions, and each of these acts according to its own rules and ways. In every year they keep a fixed day. The first is the caste of the Brahmans,<note n=1>This seems taken from Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l. See Jarrett, iii, 115. The third duty, which Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r calls &ldquo;worshipping fire,&rdquo; is by Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l termed Y&amacr;g, i.e. sacrifice.</note> that is those who know the Incomparable God. Their duties are of six kinds&mdash;(1) to acquire religious knowledge, (2) to give instructions to others, (3) to worship fire, (4) to lead men to the worship of fire, (5) giving something to the needy, (6) taking gifts. There is for this caste an appointed day, and that is the last day of the month of S&amacr;wan, the second month of the rainy season.<note n=2>It is the day of the full moon in S&amacr;wan that is holy.</note> They consider this an auspicious day, and the worshippers go on that day to the banks of rivers and tanks, and recite enchantments, breathe upon cords and coloured threads; on another day, which is the first of the New Year, they fasten them on the hands of the Rajas and great men of the time, and look on them as (good) omens. They call this thread <hi>r&amacr;kh&imacr;</hi>,<note n=3>Blochmann, p. 184, and Wilson&apos;s Glossary. Baday&umacr;n&imacr; (Lowe, p. 269) speaks of Akbar&apos;s wearing the <hi>r&amacr;kh&imacr;</hi> on the 8th day of Virgo. I do not know why Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r calls the day after the last day of S&amacr;wan the first day of the New Year. Perhaps <hi>r&umacr;z-i-duyam</hi> here means &lsquo;another day,&rsquo; and not &lsquo;the next day&rsquo;; but then, if so, why is it the rakhi day, for that is in S&amacr;wan? The Hindu New Year begins in Bais&amacr;kh (April). It will be observed from Jarrett, ii, 17, that S&amacr;wan is also the name of a month of a particular length. Perhaps Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r has confused the two things.</note> that is, preservation (<hi>nig&amacr;h-d&amacr;&shbarb;t</hi>). This day occurs in the month of T&imacr;r, when the world-heating sun is in the constellation of Cancer. The second caste is that of the Chhatr&imacr;, which is known as Khatr&imacr;. Their duty is to protect the oppressed from the evil of the oppressors. The customs of this caste are three <pb id=pb245 n=245>things&mdash;(1) that they study religious science themselves but do not teach others; (2) that they worship fire, but do not teach others to do so; (3) that they give to the needy, but although they are needy take nothing themselves. The day of this caste is the <hi>Bijay dasam&imacr;n</hi>, &lsquo;the victorious tenth.&rsquo;<note n=1>It is the 10th of Asw&imacr;n (September).</note> On this day with them it is lucky to mount and go against one&apos;s enemy with an army. R&amacr;m Chand, whom they worship as their god, leading his army on that day against his enemy won a victory, and they consider this a great day, and, decorating their elephants and horses, perform worship. This day falls in the month of &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war,<note n=2>The text wrongly has <hi>dar har m&amacr;h</hi> instead of only <hi>dar mah</hi>.</note> when the Sun is in the mansion of Virgo, and on it they give presents to those who look after their horses and elephants. The third caste is that of Bai&shbarb; (Vai&shbarb;ya)<corr>.</corr> Its custom is this, that they serve the other two castes of which mention has been made. They practise agriculture and buying and selling, and are employed in the business of profit and interest. This caste has also a fixed day which they call the Dew&amacr;l&imacr;; this day occurs in the month of Mihr when the sun is in the constellation of Libra, the 28th day of the lunar month. On the night of that day they light lamps, and friends and those who are dear assemble in each other&apos;s houses and pass their time busily in gambling. As the eyes of this caste are on profit and interest, they consider carrying over and opening new accounts on that day auspicious. The fourth caste is the Sudras, who are the lowest caste of the Hindus. They are the servants of all, and derive no profit from those things which are the specialities of every (other) caste. Thursday is the Hol&imacr;, which in their belief is the last day of the year. This day occurs in the month of Isfand&amacr;rmu&zbarb;, when the sun is in the constellation of Pisces. On the night of <pb id=pb246 n=246>this day they light fires at the head of the streets and ways, and when it becomes day they for one watch scatter the ashes on each other&apos;s heads and faces, and make a wonderful noise and disturbance, and after this wash themselves, put on their apparel, and walk about in the gardens and on the plains. As it is an established custom of the Hindus to burn the dead, to light fires on this night, which is the last night of the year that has passed, signifies that they burn the last year, which has gone to the abode of the dead. In the time of my revered father the Hindu Amirs and others in imitation of them performed the ceremony of rakhi in adorning him, making strings of rubies and royal pearls and flowers jewelled with gems of great value and binding them on his auspicious arms. This custom was carried on for some years. As they carried this extravagance to excess, and he disliked it, he forbade it. The brahmans by way of auguries used to tie these strings and (pieces of) silk according to their custom. I also in this year carried out this laudable religious practice, and ordered that the Hindu Amirs and the heads of the caste<note n=1>The negative in text is wrong apparently. It does not occur in MS. No. 181 I.O. nor in the B.M. MSS., which have <hi>ba</hi> instead of <hi>na</hi>.</note> should fasten rakhis on my arms. On the day of the rakhi, which was the 9th Amurd&amacr;d, they performed the same rites, and other castes by way of imitation did not give up this bigotry; this year I agreed to it, and ordered that the brahmans should bind strings (of cotton) and silk after the ancient manner. On this day by chance fell the anniversary of the death of the late king.<note n=2>That is, 9th Amurd&amacr;d corresponded with the &Hdotb;ijra date of Akbar&apos;s death, viz. 13th Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-&sumlb;-&sumlb;&amacr;n&imacr;, which this year, 1022, occurred in July. According to the solar calendar Akbar&apos;s death was in October.</note> The commemoration of such an anniversary is one of the standing rules and customs in Hindustan. Every year on the day of the death of their fathers and those who <pb id=pb247 n=247>are dear to them, each according to his circumstances and ability prepares food and all kinds of perfumes, and the learned men, the respectable and other men assemble, and these assemblies sometimes last a week. On this day I sent B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram to the venerated tomb to arrange the assemblage, and 10,000 rupees were given to ten trustworthy servants to divide among fakirs and those who were in want.

<p>On the 15th of the month of Amurd&amacr;d the offering of Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n was laid before me. He had sent 28 elephants, 40 horses of that part of the country which are known as <hi>&tdotb;&amacr;nghan</hi>, 50 eunuchs, 500 <hi>parg&amacr;la naf&imacr;s sit&amacr;rk&amacr;&ndota;&imacr;</hi>.<note n=1><hi>Parg&amacr;las</hi> seem to be clothes of some sort. Perhaps the word is another form of the <hi>farg&umacr;l</hi> of Blochmann, p. 89. The text has <hi>sit&amacr;rk&amacr;ni</hi>. <hi>Sit&amacr;r</hi> means a veil, but probably we should read <hi>Sonarg&amacr;oni</hi>, &lsquo;of Sonargaon.&rsquo; Both the MSS. give the number of elephants as 68 instead of 28 as in text.</note>

<p>It had been made a rule that the events of the Subahs should be reported according to the boundaries of each, and news-writers from the Court had been appointed for this duty. This being the rule that my revered father had laid down, I also observe it, and much gain and great advantage are to be brought about by it and information is acquired about the world and its inhabitants. If the advantages of this were to be written down it would become a long affair. At this time the news-writer of Lahore reported that at the end of the month of T&imacr;r ten men had gone from the city to Am&amacr;n&amacr;b&amacr;d, which lies at a distance of 12 kos. As the air was very hot, they took shelter under a tree. Soon afterwards wind and a dust-storm (<hi>chakr&imacr;</hi>) sprang up, and when it blew on that band of men they trembled, and nine of them died under the tree, and only one remained alive; he was ill for a long time, and recovered with great difficulty. In that neighbourhood such bad <pb id=pb248 n=248>air was created that numerous birds who had their nests in that tree all fell down and died, and that the wild beasts (beasts of the plain, perhaps cattle) came and threw themselves on to the cultivated fields, and, rolling about on the grass, gave up their lives. In short, many animals perished. On Thursday, the 13th Amurd&amacr;d, having said my prayers (lit. counted my rosary), I embarked on board a boat for the purpose of hunting in the village of Samonagar, which is one of my fixed hunting-places. On the 3rd &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war, &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam, whom I had sent for from the Deccan in order to despatch him to Iraq in company with the ambassador of the ruler of Iran, came and waited on me at this place. He offered 100 muhrs. As Samonagar was in Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s jagir, he had prepared a delightful halting-place there on the bank of the river, and it pleased me greatly. He presented offerings of an elephant and an emerald ring. The former was put into my private stud. Up to the 6th &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war I was employed in hunting. In these few days 47 head of antelope, male and female, and other animals were killed. At this time Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n sent as an offering a ruby, which was accepted. I sent a special sword for Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n. I increased the mansab of Hasan &ayin;Al&imacr; Turkum&amacr;n, which was 1,000 personal and 700 horse, by 500 personal and 100 horse. At the end of Thursday, the 20th of the same month, in the house of Maryam-zam&amacr;n&imacr;, my solar weighing took place. I weighed myself according to the usual custom against metals and other things. I had this year attained to the age of 44 solar years. On the same day Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr;, ambassador of the ruler of Iran, and &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam, who had been nominated to accompany him from this side, received their leave to go. On Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr; there were bestowed a horse with a jewelled saddle, a jewelled sword, a vest without sleeves with gold embroidery, an aigrette with feathers and a <hi>j&imacr;&ghbarb;a</hi> (turban ornament), and 30,000 <pb id=pb249 n=249>rupees in cash, altogether 40,000 rupees, and on &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam a jewelled <hi>khapwa</hi> or <hi>ph&umacr;l ka&tdotb;&amacr;ra</hi> (a sort of dagger) with a pendant of royal pearls. On the 22nd of the same month I visited the venerated mausoleum of my revered father at Bihi&shbarb;t&amacr;b&amacr;d, riding on an elephant. On the way 5,000 rupees in small coin were scattered round, and I gave other 5,000 rupees to &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n to divide among the dervishes. Having said my evening prayers, I went back to the city in a boat. As the house of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah was on the bank of the river Jumna, I alighted there until the end of the next day. Having accepted what pleased me of his offerings, I went towards the palace; I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s house was also on the bank of the river Jumna; at his request I disembarked there with the ladies, and walked round the houses he had lately built there. This delightful place pleased me greatly. He had produced suitable offerings of cloth stuffs and jewels and other things; these were all laid before me and most of them were approved. When it was near evening I entered the auspicious palace. As the astrologers had fixed an hour in this night for starting for Ajmir, when seven gharis of the night of Monday, the 2nd &Shbarb;a&ayin;b&amacr;n, corresponding with the 24th &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war, had passed, I started in happiness and prosperity with intent to go there from the capital of Agra. In this undertaking two things were agreeable to me, one a pilgrimage to the splendid mausoleum of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n Chi&shbarb;t&imacr;, from the blessing of whose illustrious soul great advantages had been derived by this dignified family, and whose venerable shrine I had not visited after my accession to the throne. The second was the defeat and beating back of the rebel R&amacr;n&amacr; Amar Singh, who is one of the most considerable of the Zamindars and Rajas of Hindustan, and whose headship and leadership and those of his ancestors all the Rajas and Rays of this province agree to. The administration has for long been in the <pb id=pb250 n=250>hands of this family, and they have long borne rule towards the East, that is the P&umacr;rab. They became in that time well known under the title of Rajas. After this they fell on the Deccan<note n=1>See Jarrett, ii, 268, where it is said that an ancestor of B&amacr;ppa came to Berar.</note> and took possession of many of the countries of that region. In the place of Raja they have taken the title of R&amacr;wal. After this they came into the hill country of Mew&amacr;t, and by degrees got into their possession the fort of Chitor. From that date until this day, which is in the eighth year after my accession, 1,471 years have passed.<note n=2>According to Tod, B&amacr;ppa, the ancestor of the R&amacr;n&amacr;, acquired Chitor in <hi rend=sc>A.D.</hi> 728. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r makes twenty-six princes rule for 1,010 years and twenty-six others only reign for 461 years! Tod says the legendary ancestor Kenek Sen, the sixty-third from Loh, the son of R&amacr;m, emigrated from the Panjab to Gujarat in 145 <hi rend=sc>A.D.</hi> Perhaps the Mew&amacr;t of the T&umacr;zuk is a mistake for Mew&amacr;r.</note>

<p>There are twenty-six others of this caste who have ruled for 1,010 years. They have the title of R&amacr;wal, and from the R&amacr;wal who was first known as R&amacr;wal down to R&amacr;n&amacr; Amar Singh, the present R&amacr;n&amacr;, there are twenty-six individuals who have ruled for the space of 461 years. During this long time they have never bent their necks in obedience to any of the kings of the country of Hindustan, and have for most of the time been rebellious and troublesome, so much so that in the reign of the late king B&amacr;bar, R&amacr;n&amacr; S&amacr;ng&amacr; collected together all the Rajas, Rays, and Zamindars of this province, and fought a battle in the neighbourhood of Biy&amacr;na with 180,000 horse and several lakhs of foot-soldiers. By the aid of Almighty God and the assistance of fortune the victorious army of Isl&amacr;m prevailed against the infidel forces, and a great defeat happened to them. The details of this battle have been given in the Memoirs of King B&amacr;bar. My revered father (may his bright tomb be the abode of unending Grace) exerted himself greatly <pb id=pb251 n=251>to put down these rebels, and several times sent armies against them. In the twelfth year after his accession he set himself to capture the fort of Chitor, which is one of the strongest forts of the inhabited world, and to overthrow the kingdom of the R&amacr;n&amacr;, and after four months and ten days of siege took it by force from the men of Amar Singh&apos;s father, after much fighting, and returned after destroying the fort. Every time the victorious forces pressed him hard in order to capture him or make him a fugitive, but it so happened that this was not effected. In the end of his reign, on the same day and hour that he proceeded to the conquest of the Deccan, he sent me with a large army and reliable Sardars against the R&amacr;n&amacr;. By chance these two affairs, for reasons which it would take too long to recount, did not succeed. At last I came to the throne, and as this matter was only half done, the first army I sent to the borders was this one. Making my son Parw&imacr;z its leader, the leading nobles who were at the capital were appointed to this duty. I sent abundant treasure and artillery with him. As every matter depends on its own season, at this juncture the unhappy affair of &Khbarb;usrau occurred, and I had to pursue him to the Panjab. The province and the capital of Agra remained void. I had necessarily to write that Parw&imacr;z should return with some of the Amirs and take charge of Agra and the neighbourhood. In short, this time again the matter of the R&amacr;n&amacr; did not go off as it should. When by the favour of Allah my mind was at rest from &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s disturbance, and Agra became again the alighting place of the royal standards, a victorious army was appointed under the leadership of Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and other leaders, and from that date up to the time when the royal standards started for Ajmir his country was trodden under foot by the victorious forces. As finally the affair did not assume <pb id=pb252 n=252>an approved form, it occurred to me that, as I had nothing to do at Agra, and I was convinced that until I myself went there the affair would not be set to rights, I left the fort of Agra and alighted at the Dahrah garden. On the next day the festival of the Dasahr&amacr; took place. According to the usual custom they decorated the elephants and horses, and I had them before me. As the mothers and sisters of &Khbarb;usrau repeatedly represented to me that he was very repentant of his deeds, the feelings (lit. sweat) of fatherly affection having come into movement, I sent for him and determined that he should come every day to pay his respects to me. I remained for eight days in that garden. On the 28th news arrived that R&amacr;ja R&amacr;m D&amacr;s, who was doing service in Bangash and the neighbourhood of Kabul with Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, had died. On the 1st of the month of Mihr I marched from the garden, and dismissed &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n to look after the capital of Agra and guard the treasure and the palace, and gave him an elephant and a special robe (<hi>fargul</hi>). On the 2nd Mihr news arrived that R&amacr;ja B&amacr;so had died in the thanah of Shahabad,<note n=1>Probably the town of that name in the Rajputana State of Jhal&amacr;war. See &ldquo;Rajputana Gazetteer,&rdquo; ii, 211.</note> which is on the border of the territory of Amar. On the 10th of the same month I halted at R&umacr;p B&amacr;s, which has now been named Am&amacr;n&amacr;b&amacr;d. Formerly this district had been given as jagir to R&umacr;p &Khbarb;aw&amacr;&sdotb;&sdotb;. Afterwards, bestowing it on Am&amacr;nu-llah, son of Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, I ordered it to be called by his name. Eleven days were passed at this halting-place. As it is a fixed hunting-place, I every day mounted to go hunting, and in these few days 158 antelopes, male and female, and other animals were killed. On the 25th of the month I marched from Am&amacr;n&amacr;b&amacr;d. On the 31st, corresponding with the 8th Rama&zdotb;&amacr;n, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan, whom I had sent for from Burhanpur, came and waited on me, <pb id=pb253 n=253>and presented as offerings 50 muhrs, 15 jewelled vessels, and an elephant, which I placed in my private stud. On the 2nd &Amacr;b&amacr;n, corresponding with the 10th Rama&zdotb;&amacr;n, news came of the death of Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n. He was one of the ancient servants of the State, and obtained the mercy of God in the 80th year of his age. He was employed at Peshawar in the duty of keeping in order the Afghans full of darkness.<note n=1>The Rau&shbarb;an&imacr;s, called by their enemies the T&amacr;r&imacr;k&imacr;s.</note> His rank was 6,000 personal and 5,000 horse. Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Dakhan&imacr; was unrivalled in the art of <hi>p&umacr;lta-b&amacr;z&imacr;</hi>, which in the language of the Dakhanis they call <hi>yag&amacr;nag&imacr;</hi>, and the Moguls <hi>&shbarb;am&shbarb;&imacr;r-b&amacr;z&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;sword-play&rsquo; (fencing). For some time I studied it with him. At this time I exalted him with the title of Warzi&shbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n (Exercise-&Khbarb;&amacr;n). I had established a custom that deserving people and dervishes should be brought before me every night, so that I might bestow on them, after personal enquiry into their condition, land, or gold, or clothes. Amongst these was a man who represented to me that the name Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, according to the science of <hi>abjad</hi> (numerals reckoned by letters), corresponded to the great name &ldquo;Allah Akbar.&rdquo;<note n=2>Both Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r and Allah Akbar yield 288.</note> Considering this a good omen, I gave him who discovered (this coincidence) land, a horse, cash, and clothing. On Monday, the 5th &Shbarb;aww&amacr;l, corresponding to the 26th &Amacr;b&amacr;n, the hour for entering Ajmir was fixed. On the morning of the said day I went towards it. When the fort and the buildings of the shrine of the revered &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja appeared in sight, I traversed on foot the remainder of the road, about a kos. I placed trustworthy men on both sides of the road, who went along giving money to fakirs and the necessitous. When four gharis of day had passed, I entered the city and its inhabited portion, and in the fifth ghari had the honour of visiting the venerated mausoleum. After visiting it I proceeded to <pb id=pb254 n=254>the auspicious palace, and the next day ordered all those present in this honoured resting-place, both small and great, belonging to the city, and travellers, to be brought before me, that they might be made happy with numerous gifts according to their real circumstances. On the 7th &Amacr;&zbarb;ar I went to see and shoot on the tank of Pushkar, which is one of the established praying-places of the Hindus, with regard to the perfection of which they give (excellent) accounts that are incredible to any intelligence, and which is situated at a distance of three kos from Ajmir. For two or three days I shot water-fowl on that tank, and returned to Ajmir. Old and new temples which, in the language of the infidels, they call Deohara<note n=1>Sanskrit Devahar&amacr;, &lsquo;an idol temple.&rsquo;</note> are to be seen around this tank. Among them R&amacr;n&amacr; &Shbarb;ankar, who is the uncle of the rebel Amar, and in my kingdom is among the high nobles, had built a Deohara of great magnificence, on which 100,000 rupees had been spent. I went to see that temple. I found a form cut out of black stone, which from the neck above was in the shape of a pig&apos;s head, and the rest of the body was like that of a man. The worthless religion of the Hindus is this, that once on a time for some particular object the Supreme Ruler thought it necessary to show himself in this shape; on this account they hold it dear and worship it.<note n=2>&ldquo;Rajputana Gazetteer,&rdquo; ii, 69.</note> I ordered them to break that hideous form and throw it into the tank. After looking at this building there appeared a white dome on the top of a hill, to which men were coming from all quarters. When I asked about this they said that a Jog&imacr; lived there, and when the simpletons come to see him he places in their hands a handful<note n=3>Instead of <hi>kaff &amacr;rdi</hi>, &lsquo;a handful of flour,&rsquo; the R.A.S. MS. has <hi>kaf az way</hi>, &lsquo;his spittle,&rsquo; and this seems more likely.</note> of flour, which they put into their mouths and imitate the cry <pb id=pb255 n=255>of an animal which these fools have at some time injured, in order that by this act their sins may be blotted out. I ordered them to break down that place and turn the Jog&imacr; out of it, as well as to destroy the form of an idol there was in the dome. Another belief they have is that there is no bottom to this tank. After enquiry it appeared that it is nowhere deeper than 12 cubits. I also measured it round and it was about 1&frac12; kos.

<p>On the 16th &Amacr;&zbarb;ar news came that the watchmen had marked down a tigress. I immediately went there and killed it with a gun and returned. After a few days a nilgaw (blue bull) was killed, of which I ordered them to take off the skin in my presence and cook it as food for the poor. Over 200 people assembled and ate it, and I gave money with my own hand to each of them. In the same month news came that the Franks of Goa had, contrary to treaty, plundered four cargo vessels<note n=1>Text <hi>ajnab&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;foreign&rsquo; or &lsquo;strange,&rsquo; and Dowson had the same reading, for at vi, 337, we have the translation &lsquo;ships engaged in the foreign trade of Surat.&rsquo; But I adopt the reading of I.O. MS. 181, which is <hi>ajn&amacr;s&imacr;</hi>, as it does not seem likely that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r would interest himself about &lsquo;foreign&rsquo; ships.</note> that frequented the port of Surat in the neighbourhood of that port: and, making prisoners a large number of Musulmans, had taken possession of the goods and chattels that were in those ships. This being very disagreeable to my mind, I despatched Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who is in charge of the port, on the 18th &Amacr;&zbarb;ar, giving him a horse and elephant and a dress of honour, to obtain compensation for this affair. On account of the great activity and good services of Y&umacr;suf &Khbarb;&amacr;n and Bah&amacr;duru-l-mulk in the Subah of the Deccan, I sent standards for them.

<p>It has been written that my chief object, after my visit to the &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, was to put a stop to the affair of the rebel R&amacr;n&amacr;. On this account I determined to remain myself at <pb id=pb256 n=256>Ajmir and send on B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram, my fortunate son. This idea was a very good one, and on this account, on the 6th of Day, at the hour fixed upon, I despatched him in happiness and triumph. I presented him with a <hi>qab&amacr;</hi> (outer coat) of gold brocade with jewelled flowers and pearls round the flowers, a brocaded turban with strings of pearls, a gold woven sash with chains of pearls, one of my private elephants called Fat&hdotb; Gaj, with trappings, a special horse, a jewelled sword, and a jewelled <hi>khapwa</hi>, with a <hi>ph&umacr;l ka&tdotb;&amacr;ra</hi>. In addition to the men first appointed to this duty under the leadership of &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, I sent 12,000 more horse with my son, and honoured their leaders, each according to his condition, with special horses and elephants and robes of honour, and dismissed them. Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n was nominated to the paymastership of this army. At the same time &Sdotb;afdar &Khbarb;&amacr;n was despatched to the government of Kashmir in place of H&amacr;shim &Khbarb;&amacr;n. He received a horse and robe of honour. On Wednesday, the 11th, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan was made general paymaster (<hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;-kul</hi>), and received a dress of honour. I had ordered them to make a large caldron<note n=1>&ldquo;Rajputana Gazetteer,&rdquo; ii, 63. There are now two large caldrons (<hi>d&imacr;g</hi>) inside the <hi>darg&umacr;h</hi> enclosure.</note> at Agra for the revered mausoleum of the &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja. On this day it was brought, and I ordered them to cook food for the poor in that pot, and collect together the poor of Ajmir to feed them whilst I was there. Five thousand people assembled, and all ate of this food to their fill. After the food I gave money to each of the dervishes with my own hand. At this time Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Bengal, was promoted to the mansab of 6,000 personal and horse, and a flag was given to Mukarram &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Mu&ayin;&amacr;&zumlb;&zumlb;am &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>On the 1st of Isfand&amacr;rmu&zbarb;, corresponding with the 10th Mu&hdotb;arram, 1023 (20th February, 1614), I left <pb id=pb257 n=257>Ajmir to hunt nilgaw, and returned on the 9th. I halted at the fountain of &Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb; Jam&amacr;l,<note n=1>&Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb; Jam&amacr;l was the name of the saint Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n&apos;s daughter (&ldquo;Rajputana Gazetteer,&rdquo; ii, 62). It lies at the back of the Taragarh hill, and is now commonly called N&umacr;r-cha&shbarb;ma. The fountains, etc., are in a ruined state. Sir Thomas Roe visited this place (id., p. 123).</note> two kos from the city, and passed the night of Friday<note n=2><hi>&Shbarb;ab-i-jum&ayin;a</hi>, which is Friday eve according to Blochmann.</note> there. At the end of the day I entered the city. In these twenty days ten nilgaw had been killed. As the good service of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n and the smallness of his force for the defence and government of Agra and that neighbourhood were brought to my notice, I increased his mansab by 500 personal and 100 horse. On the same day Ab&umacr;-l-fat&hdotb; Dakhan&imacr; came from his jagir and waited on me. On the 3rd of the same month news came of the death of Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n; he had died on Thursday, the 5th Rajab, in the year 1022 (21st August, 1613). In one day, without any previous illness, this inevitable event occurred. He was one of those born and brought up in the house (house-born). The naturally good disposition and knowledge of affairs that showed themselves in him were seen in no one else. He ruled Bengal with entire authority, and brought within the civil jurisdiction of the province countries that had never previously come under the sway of any of the jagirdars or into the possession of any of the Chiefs of the State. If death had not overtaken him he would have done perfect service.

<p>The &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am had himself prayed that the illustrious prince should be appointed to the campaign against the R&amacr;n&amacr;, yet, notwithstanding all kinds of encouragement and gratification on the part of my son (&Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n), he would not apply himself to the task, but proceeded to act in his own unworthy manner. When this was heard by me, I sent Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Hdotb;usain, who was one of my most trusty attendants, to him, and sent affectionate <pb id=pb258 n=258>messages to him to say that when he was at Burhanpur he had daily begged this duty of me, as he considered it equivalent to the happiness of both worlds, and had said in meetings and assemblies that if he should be killed in this enterprise he would be a martyr, and if he prevailed, a &ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;. I had given him whatever support and assistance of artillery he had asked for. After this he had written that without the movement of the royal standards to those regions the completion of the affair was not free of difficulty. By his counsel I had come to Ajmir, and this neighbourhood had been thus honoured and dignified. Now that he had himself prayed for the prince, and everything had been carried out according to his counsel, why did he withdraw his foot from the field of battle and enter the place of disagreement? To B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram, from whom up till now I had never parted, and whom I sent in pure reliance on his (&Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am&apos;s) knowledge of affairs, he should show loyalty and approved good-will, and never be neglectful day or night of his duty to my son. If, contrariwise, he should draw back his foot from what he had agreed to, he must know that there would be mischief. Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Hdotb;usain went, and impressed these words on his mind in the same detailed way. It was of no avail, as he would not go back from his folly and determination. When B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram saw that his being in the affair was a cause of disturbance, he kept him under observation and represented that his being there was in no way fitting, and he was acting thus and spoiling matters simply on account of the connection he had with &Khbarb;usrau.<note n=1>&Khbarb;usrau was married to his daughter.</note> I then ordered Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n to go and bring him from Udaipur, and told Mu&hdotb;ammad Taq&imacr;, the diwan of buildings, to go to Mandes&umacr;r and bring his children and dependants to Ajmir.

<p>On the 11th of the month news came that Dul&imacr;p, son <pb id=pb259 n=259>of R&amacr;y Singh, who was of a seditious and rebellious disposition, had been heavily defeated by his younger brother, R&amacr;o S&umacr;raj Singh, who had been sent against him, and that he was making disturbance in one of the districts of the Sarkar of &Hdotb;i&sdotb;&sdotb;ar. About this time H&amacr;shim of &Khbarb;ost, the faujd&amacr;r, and the jagirdars of that neighbourhood seized him, and sent him as a prisoner to Court. As he had misbehaved repeatedly, he was capitally punished, and this was a warning to many of the seditious. In reward for this service an increase of 500 personal and 200 horse was made to the mansab of R&amacr;o S&umacr;raj Singh. On the 14th of the month a representation came from my son B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram that the elephant &ayin;&Amacr;lam-gum&amacr;n, of which the R&amacr;n&amacr; was very fond, together with seventeen other elephants, had fallen into the hands of the warriors of the victorious army, and that his master would also soon be captured.



<div1 id=yr9>
<head>The Ninth New Year&apos;s Feast after my auspicious Accession.</head>


<p>The commencement of the ninth year after my auspicious accession, corresponding with the Hijra year 1023 (1614).

<p>Two watches and one ghari had passed on the night of Friday, the 9th &Sdotb;afar (21st March, 1614), when the world-warming sun shed his rays on the constellation of Aries, which is his house of dignity and honour; it was the first morning of the month of Farward&imacr;n. The assembly for the New Year&apos;s festival took place in the pleasant regions of Ajmir, and at the time of entry (of the sun into Aries), which was the propitious hour, I seated myself on the throne of good fortune. They had in the usual manner decorated the palace with rare cloth-stuffs and jewels and gem-decked things. At this <pb id=pb260 n=260>auspicious moment the elephant &ayin;&Amacr;lam-gum&amacr;n,<note n=1>The &ldquo;Arrogant of the Earth&rdquo; (Tod).</note> which was fit to be entered in the private stud, with the seventeen other male and female elephants which my son B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram had sent of the R&amacr;n&amacr;&apos;s elephants, were presented before me, and the hearts of the loyal rejoiced. On the 2nd day of the New Year, knowing it to be propitious for a ride, I mounted it and scattered about much money. On the 3rd I conferred on I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n a mansab of 3,000 personal and 1,000 horse, increasing thus that which he had already, which was of 2,000 personal and 500 horse, and I distinguished him with the title of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, with which title two of his family had been previously honoured. I also increased the mansab of Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n by 500 personal and 200 horse. At the same time I promoted I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah to the mansab of 5,000 personal and 2,000 horse. At the request of B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram I increased the mansab of Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n B&amacr;rha by 500 personal and 200 horse, that of Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n by the same number, that of Ki&shbarb;an Singh by 500 horse, and that of Sarfar&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n by 500 personal and 300 horse. On Sunday, the 10th, the offering of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n was produced before me, and on the 14th I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah produced his own offering. From these two offerings I took what pleased me and gave back the rest. Ch&imacr;n Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, with his brothers, relations, and the army and retinue of his father, came from Kabul<note n=2>Perhaps this means Peshawar, for apparently Qil&imacr;j was there when he died.</note> and waited on me. Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had a mansab of 700 personal and 300 horse, having been promoted to that of 1,500 personal and 600 horse, was appointed jointly with &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan to the exalted dignity of paymaster of the household. On the 15th of this month Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been appointed to bring &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am and his son &ayin;Abdu-llah, came and waited <pb id=pb261 n=261>on me. On the 19th the assembly of honour was held. On that day the offering of Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n was laid before me, and I sent a private elephant called R&umacr;p Sundar for my son Parw&imacr;z. When that day had passed I ordered them to deliver &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am into the charge of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, that he might keep him in the fort of Gwalior. As my object in sending him to the fort was in case some disagreement and disturbance should occur in the matter of the R&amacr;n&amacr; in consequence of the attachment that he had to &Khbarb;usrau, I ordered him not to be kept in the fort like a prisoner, but that they should provide everything necessary for his comfort and convenience in the way of eating and clothing. On the same day I promoted Ch&imacr;n Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n to a mansab of 2,500 personal and 700 horse. To the rank of T&amacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been appointed to the charge of the province of Bhakar, I added 500 personal and horse. On the 18th Urd&imacr;bihi&shbarb;t I forbade &Khbarb;usrau to pay his respects. The reason was this, that through the affection and fatherly love (I bore him) and the prayers of his mother and sisters, I had ordered again that he should come every day to pay his respects (<hi>k&umacr;rni&shbarb;</hi>). As his appearance showed no signs of openness and happiness, and he was always mournful and dejected in mind, I accordingly ordered that he should not come to pay his respects. In the time of my revered father, Mu&zumlb;affar &Hdotb;usain M&imacr;rz&amacr; and Rustam M&imacr;rz&amacr;, sons of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Hdotb;usain M&imacr;rz&amacr;, nephews of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Tumlb;ahm&amacr;sp &Sdotb;afaw&imacr;, who had in their possession Qandahar and Zam&imacr;nd&amacr;war and that neighbourhood, sent petitions to the effect that in consequence of the nearness to Khurasan and the coming of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n &Umacr;zbeg to that country, they could not leave the charge of looking after the country and come (to pay their respects), but that if he (Akbar) would send one of the servants of the palace they would hand over the country to him, and themselves come to pay their respects. <pb id=pb262 n=262>As they repeatedly made this request, he sent &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who is now honoured with the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n, to the governorship of Qandahar and Zam&imacr;nd&amacr;war and that neighbourhood, and wrote firmans full of favour to the M&imacr;rz&amacr;s summoning them to the Court. After their arrival favours appropriate to the case of each were bestowed on them, and he gave them a territory equal to two or three times the collections of Qandahar. In the end, the management expected from them was not achieved, and by degrees the territory deteriorated. Mu&zumlb;affar &Hdotb;usain M&imacr;rz&amacr; died during the lifetime of my revered father, and he sent M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam with the Khankhanan to the Subah of the Deccan, where he had a small jagir. When the throne was honoured by my succession, I sent for him from the Deccan with the intention of showing him favour and sending him to one of the border territories. About the time he came M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n, who held the governorship of Thatta and Qandahar and that neighbourhood, died. It occurred to me to send him to Thatta, so that he might show there his natural good qualities and administer that country in an approved manner. I promoted him to a mansab of 5,000 personal and horse, 200,000 rupees were given to him for expenses, and I despatched him to the Subah of Thatta. My belief was that he would do good service<note n=1>According to the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, iii, 486, in the biography of &ayin;&Imacr;s&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Rustam was sent to put down the Tar&khbarb;&amacr;ns, and succeeded in doing so. See also ibid., p. 438, in the biography of Rustam, where it is said that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r told him to send away the Arghuns. Perhaps the passage in Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, p. 438, which according to Blochmann, p. 314, means that Rustam ill-treated the Arghuns, rather means that he intrigued with them but oppressed the peasantry.</note> on those borders. In opposition to my expectation he did no service, and committed so much oppression that many people complained of his wickedness. Such news of him was heard that it was considered necessary to recall him. <pb id=pb263 n=263>One of the servants of the Court was appointed to summon him, and I sent for him to Court. On the 26th Urd&imacr;bihi&shbarb;t they brought him. As he had committed great oppression on the people of God, and inquiry into this was due according to the requirements of justice, I handed him over to An&imacr;r&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; Singh-dalan that he might enquire into the facts, and that if guilty he might receive prompt punishment and be a warning to others. In those days the news also came of the defeat of A&hdotb;d&amacr;d, the Afghan. The facts are that Mu&ayin;taqid &Khbarb;&amacr;n came to P&umacr;lam<note n=1>Though the text has P&umacr;lam, the real word seems to be &Imacr;lam or Ailam. Ailam Gu&zbarb;ar appears to be a pass in a range of hills. It may, however, be a ferry on the Kabul River. That river seems to be also known as the &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam, and there is a ferry on it of that name. The text speaks of Kot T&imacr;r&amacr;h as 8 kos from Jalalabad, but T&imacr;r&amacr;h is much further away. The B.M. MSS. have <hi>Kotal-i-T&imacr;r&amacr;h</hi>, &lsquo;the T&imacr;r&amacr;h defile.&rsquo;</note> Guzar (ferry?), in the district of Peshawar, with an army, and &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n with another force in Afghanistan and blocked the path of that rascal (lit. black-faced one). Meanwhile a letter came to Mu&ayin;taqid &Khbarb;&amacr;n from Pish Bulagh that A&hdotb;d&amacr;d had gone to Ko&tdotb; T&imacr;r&amacr;h, which is 8 kos from Jalalabad, with a large number of horse and foot, and had killed a few of those who had chosen to be loyal and obey, and made prisoners of others, and was about to send them to T&imacr;r&amacr;h, and intended to make a raid on Jalalabad and Pish Bulagh. Immediately on hearing this news Mu&ayin;taqid &Khbarb;&amacr;n started in great haste with the troops he had with him. When he arrived at Pish Bulagh he sent out spies to ascertain about the enemy. On the morning of Wednesday, the 6th, news reached him that A&hdotb;d&amacr;d was in the same place. Placing his trust on the favour of God, which is on the side of this suppliant at the throne of Allah, he divided the royal army into two, and went towards the enemy, who, with 4,000 or 5,000 experienced men, had seated themselves haughtily in complete carelessness, <pb id=pb264 n=264>and did not suspect that besides &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n&apos;s there was an army in the neighbourhood that could oppose itself to them. When news came that the royal forces were coming against that ill-fortuned man, and the signs of an army were becoming manifest, in a state of bewilderment he distributed his men into four bodies, and seating himself on an eminence a gunshot away, to get to which was a difficult matter, he sent his men to fight. The musketeers of the victorious army assailed the rebel with bullets, and sent a large number to hell. Mu&ayin;taqid &Khbarb;&amacr;n took the centre of his army to his advanced guard, and, not giving the enemy more than time to shoot off their arrows two or three times, swept them clean away, and pursuing them for 3 or 4 kos, killed nearly 1,500 of them, horse and foot. Those left of the sword took to flight, most of them wounded and with their arms thrown away. The victorious army remained for the night in the same place on the battlefield, and in the morning proceeded with 600 decapitated heads<note n=1>Compare Price&apos;s Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, p. 94. It appears from that account that Mu&ayin;taqid <hi>alias</hi> La&shbarb;kar &Khbarb;&amacr;n was originally called Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;usain. According to the account there, the prisoners were brought to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r with the decapitated heads of 17,000 (!) suspended from their necks!</note> towards Peshawar and made pillars of the heads there. Five hundred horses and innumerable cattle and property and many weapons fell into their hands. The prisoners of T&imacr;r&amacr;h were released, and on this side no well-known men were killed. On the night of Thursday, the 1st of &Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;d, I proceeded towards Pushkar to shoot tigers, and on Friday killed two of them with a gun. On the same day it was represented to me that Naq&imacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n had died. The aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n was one of the Saif&imacr; Sayyids, and was originally from Qazwin. The tomb of his father, M&imacr;r &ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f, is at Ajmir. Two months before his death his wife,<note n=2>She was a daughter of M&imacr;r Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d, Akbar&apos;s secretary (Blochmann, p. 449).</note> between whom and her husband there was <pb id=pb265 n=265>a great affection, and who for twelve days was ill with fever, drank the unpleasant draught of death. I ordered them to bury him by the side of his wife, whom they had placed in the &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja&apos;s venerated mausoleum. As Mu&ayin;taqid &Khbarb;&amacr;n had done approved service in the fight with A&hdotb;d&amacr;d, in reward he was exalted with the title of La&shbarb;kar &Khbarb;&amacr;n. Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been sent to Udaipur in the service of B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram and to convey certain orders, came on the 7th &Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;d and gave good account of the rules and regulations made by B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram. Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who in the days of my princehood was my servant, and whom after my accession I had made bakhshi in this army, and who had obtained favour, gave up the deposit of his life on the 12th of the same month. M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam, as he showed signs of repentance and regret for his misdeeds, and generosity demanded that his faults should be pardoned, was, in the end of the month, summoned to my presence, and I satisfied his mind, and having given him a dress of honour, ordered him to pay his respects to me. On the night of Sunday, the 11th of the month of T&imacr;r, a female elephant in the private elephant stud gave birth to a young one in my presence. I had repeatedly ordered them to ascertain the period of their gestation; at last it became evident that for a female young one it was 18 months and for a male 19 months. In opposition to the birth of a human being, which is in most cases by a head delivery, young elephants are born with their feet first. When the young one was born, the mother scattered dust upon it with her foot, and began to be kind and to pet it. The young one for an instant remained fallen, and then rising, made towards its mother&apos;s breasts. On the 14th the assembly of Gul&amacr;b-p&amacr;&shbarb;&imacr; (sprinkling of rose-water) took place; from former times this has been known as <hi>&amacr;b-p&amacr;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> (water-sprinkling), and has become established from amongst customs of former <pb id=pb266 n=266>days. On the 5th Amurd&amacr;d (middle July, 1614) came news of the death of R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh.<note n=1>M&amacr;n Singh died in the Deccan in 1614, and apparently in the month of June.</note> The aforesaid Raja was one of the chief officers of my revered father. As I had sent many servants of the State to serve in the Deccan, I also appointed him. After his death in that service, I sent for M&imacr;rz&amacr; Bh&amacr;o Singh, who was his legitimate heir. As from the time when I was prince he had done much service with me, although the chiefship and headship of their family, according to the Hindu custom, should go to Mah&amacr; Singh, son<note n=2>Text <hi>pidar</hi> by mistake for <hi>pisar</hi>.</note> of Jagat Singh, the Raja&apos;s eldest son, who had died in the latter&apos;s lifetime, I did not accept him, but I dignified Bh&amacr;o Singh with the title of M&imacr;rz&amacr; R&amacr;ja, and raised him to the mansab of 4,000 personal and 3,000 horse. I also gave him Amber, the native place of his ancestors, and, soothing and consoling the mind of Mah&amacr; Singh, increased his former mansab by 500, and gave him as an in&ayin;&amacr;m the territory of Garha.<note n=3>Garha, described as B&amacr;ndh&umacr; in Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, ii, 175. It is Garha-Katanga, i.e. Jabalpur.</note> I also sent him a jewelled dagger belt, a horse, and dress of honour. On the 8th of this month of Amurd&amacr;d I found a change in my health, and by degrees was seized with fever and headache. For fear that some injury might occur to the country and the servants of God, I kept this secret from most of those familiar with and near to me, and did not inform the physicians and hakims. A few days passed in this manner, and I only imparted this to N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n Begam than whom I did not think anyone was fonder of me; I abstained from eating heavy foods, and, contenting myself with a little light food, went every day, according to my rule, to the public D&imacr;w&amacr;n-&khbarb;&amacr;na (hall of audience), and entered the Jharokha and <hi>ghusal-&khbarb;&amacr;na</hi> (parlour) <pb id=pb267 n=267>in my usual manner, until signs of weakness showed themselves in my skin.<note n=1>Perhaps the meaning is that there was an eruption.</note> Some of the nobles<note n=2><hi>Buzurg&amacr;n</hi>, which perhaps here means elder ladies of the harem.</note> became aware of this, and informed one or two of my physicians who were trustworthy, such as &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Mas&imacr;&hdotb;u-z-zam&amacr;n, &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Ab&umacr;-l-q&amacr;sim, and &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &ayin;Abdu-&shbarb;-&Shbarb;ak&umacr;r. As the fever did not change, and for three nights I took my usual wine, it brought on greater weakness. In the time of disquietude, and when weakness prevailed over me, I went to the mausoleum of the revered &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, and in that blessed abode prayed to God Almighty for recovery, and agreed to give alms and charity. God Almighty, in His pure grace and mercy, bestowed on me the robe of honour of health, and by degrees I recovered. The headache, which had been very severe, subsided under the remedies of &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &ayin;Abdu-&shbarb;-&Shbarb;ak&umacr;r, and in the space of twenty-two days my state returned to what it was before. The servants of the palace, and indeed the whole of the people, made offerings for this great bounty. I accepted the alms of no one, and ordered that everyone in his own house should distribute what he wished among the poor. On the 10th &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war news came that T&amacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the Afghan, governor of Thatta,<note n=3>This is T&amacr;&shbarb; Beg (Blochmann, p. 457). The text wrongly has Patna.</note> had died; he was one of the old nobles of the State.

<p>During my illness it had occurred to me that when I completely recovered, inasmuch as I was inwardly an ear-bored slave of the &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja (Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n) and was indebted to him for my existence, I should openly make holes in my ears and be enrolled among his ear-marked slaves. On Thursday, 12th &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war,<note n=4>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was born in this month, which then corresponded to Rajab.</note> corresponding to the month of Rajab, I made holes in my ears and drew into each a shining pearl. When the servants of the palace and my loyal friends saw this, both those who <pb id=pb268 n=268>were in the presence and some who were in the distant borders diligently and eagerly made holes in their ears, and adorned the beauty of sincerity with pearls and rubies which were in the private treasury, and were bestowed on them, until by degrees the infection caught the Ahadis and others. At the end of the day of Thursday, the 22nd of the said month, corresponding with the 10th &Shbarb;a&ayin;b&amacr;n, the meeting for my solar weighing was arranged in my private audience hall, and the usual observances were carried out. On the same day M&imacr;rz&amacr; R&amacr;ja Bh&amacr;o Singh, gratified and prosperous, returned to his native country with the promise that he would not delay (there) more than two or three months. On the 27th of the month of Mihr news came that Far&imacr;d&umacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Barl&amacr;s had died at Udaipur. In the clan of Barl&amacr;s no leader remained but he. As his tribe had many claims on this State and endless connection with it, I patronised his son Mihr &ayin;Al&imacr;, and raised him to the mansab of 1,000 personal and horse. On account of the approved services of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n, I increased by 1,000 his mansab, which became 6,000 personal and 5,000 horse, original and increase. On the 6th &Amacr;b&amacr;n the <hi>qar&amacr;wuls</hi> (<hi>&shbarb;ik&amacr;r&imacr;s</hi>) reported that three tigers had been met at a distance of 6 kos. Starting after midday, I killed all three of them with a gun. On the 8th of the month the festival of the Dew&amacr;l&imacr; came on. I ordered the attendants of the palace to have games with each other for two or three nights in my presence; winnings and losings took place. On the 8th of this month they brought to Ajmir the body of Sikandar Mu&ayin;&imacr;n Qar&amacr;wul (&Shbarb;ik&amacr;r&imacr;), who was one of my old attendants and had done much service for me when I was prince, from Udaipur, which was the place where my son Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram was staying. I ordered the qarawuls and his fellow-tribesmen to take his body and bury it on the bank of R&amacr;n&amacr; &Shbarb;ankar&apos;s tank. He was a good servant to me. On the 12th &Amacr;&zbarb;ar two daughters whom <pb id=pb269 n=269>Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n in his lifetime had taken from the Zamindar of K&umacr;ch (Behar), whose country is on the boundary of the eastern provinces, together with his son and 94 elephants, were brought before me. Some of the elephants were placed in my private stud. On the same day, H&umacr;&shbarb;ang, Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s son, came from Bengal, and had the good fortune to kiss the threshold, and presented as offerings two elephants, 100 muhrs, and 100 rupees. On one particular night in Day I dreamt that the late king (Akbar) said to me: &ldquo;B&amacr;b&amacr;, forgive for my sake the fault of &ayin;Az&imacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who is the &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am.&rdquo; After this dream, I decided to summon him from the fort (of Gwalior).

<p>There is a ravine in the neighbourhood of Ajmir that is very beautiful. At the end of this ravine a spring appears which is collected in a long and broad tank, and is the best water in Ajmir. This valley and spring are well known as &Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb; Jam&amacr;l. When I crossed over to this place I ordered a suitable building to be made there, as the place was good and fit for developing. In the course of a year a house and grounds were made there, the like of which those<note n=1>Is this an allusion to some complimentary remark of Sir Thomas Roe? Sir Thomas did not come to Ajmir till December, 1615, but Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r is here apparently writing of what happened a year after his visit to &Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb; Jam&amacr;l. The chronogram was 1024 (1615).</note> who travel round the world cannot point out. They made a basin 40 gaz by 40, and made the water of the spring rise up in the basin by a fountain. The fountain leaps up 10 or 12 gaz. Buildings are laid on the edge of this basin, and in the same way above, where the tank and fountain are, they have made agreeable places and enchanting halls and resting-rooms pleasant to the senses. These have been constructed and finished off in a masterly style by skilled painters and clever artists. As I desired that it should be called by a name <pb id=pb270 n=270>connected with my august name, I gave it the name of Cha&shbarb;ma-i-N&umacr;r, or &lsquo;the fountain of light.&rsquo; In short, the one fault it has is this, that it ought to have been in a large city, or at a place by which men frequently pass. From the day on which it was completed I have often passed Thursdays and Fridays there. I ordered that they should think out a chronogram for its completion. Sa&ayin;&imacr;d&amacr; G&imacr;l&amacr;n&imacr;, the head of the goldsmiths, discovered it in this clever hemistich:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;The palace<note n=1>Ma&hdotb;all-i-&Shbarb;&amacr;h N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, 1024 (1615). See Proceedings A.S.B. for August, 1873, pp. 159&ndash;60.</note> of &Shbarb;&amacr;h N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&rdquo; (1024).
</lg>


<p>I ordered them to put a stone with this carved upon it on the top of the portico of the building.

<p>In the beginning of the month of Day, merchants came from Persia and brought pomegranates of Yazd and melons from K&amacr;r&imacr;z, which are the best of Khurasan melons, so many that all the servants of the Court and the Amirs of the frontiers obtained a portion of them and were very grateful to the True Giver (God) for them. I had never had such melons and pomegranates. It seemed as if I had never had a pomegranate or a melon before. Every year I had had melons from Badakhshan and pomegranates from Kabul, but they bore no comparison with the Yazd pomegranates and the K&amacr;r&imacr;z melons. As my revered father (may God&apos;s light be his witness!) had a great liking for fruit, I was very grieved that such fruits had not come to Hindustan from Persia in his victorious time, that he might have enjoyed and profited by them. I have the same regret for the <hi>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; &ayin;i&tumlb;r</hi> (so-called otto of roses), that his nostrils were not gratified with such essences. This &ayin;i&tumlb;r is a discovery which was made during my reign through the efforts of the mother of N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n Begam. When she was making rose-water <pb id=pb271 n=271>a scum formed on the surface of the dishes into which the hot rose-water was poured from the jugs. She collected this scum little by little; when much rose-water was obtained a sensible portion of the scum was collected. It is of such strength in perfume that if one drop be rubbed on the palm of the hand it scents a whole assembly, and it appears as if many red rosebuds had bloomed at once. There is no other scent of equal excellence to it. It restores hearts that have gone and brings back withered souls. In reward for that invention I presented a string of pearls to the inventress. Sal&imacr;ma<note n=1>Sal&imacr;ma died in the 7th year, so that the discovery must have occurred some time before this mention of it.</note> Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Begam (may the lights of God be on her tomb) was present, and she gave this oil the name of &lsquo;&ayin;i&tumlb;r-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;.&rsquo;

<p>Great difference appeared in the climates of India. In this month of Day, in Lahore, which is between Persia and Hindustan, the mulberry-tree bore fruit of as much sweetness and fine flavour as in its ordinary season. For some days people were delighted by eating it. The news-writers of that place wrote this. In the same days Ba&khbarb;tar &Khbarb;&amacr;n Kal&amacr;want, who was closely connected with &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, inasmuch as he (&ayin;&Amacr;dil) married his own brother&apos;s daughter to him, and made him his preceptor in singing and <hi>durpat</hi><note n=2>Hindustani, <hi>dhurpad</hi>, &ldquo;<foreign lang=fr>petit poëme ordinairement composé de cinq hémistiches sur une même rime</foreign>.&rdquo; &ldquo;It was invented by R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n of Gwalior&rdquo; (Garçin de Tassy, <foreign lang=fr>Hist. Litt. Hindouie</foreign>, i, 12).</note> <hi>guftan</hi>, appeared in the habit of a dervish. Summoning him and enquiring into his circumstances, I endeavoured to honour him. In the first assembly I gave him 10,000 rupees in cash and 50 pieces of cloth of all sorts and a string of pearls, and having made him a guest of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, ordered him to enquire into his circumstances. It did not appear whether he had come without &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s permission, or the latter <pb id=pb272 n=272>had sent him in this guise in order that he might find out the designs of this Court and bring him news about them. Considering his relationship to &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, it is most probable that he has not come without &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s knowledge. A report by M&imacr;r Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain, who at this time was (our) ambassador at Bijapur, corroborates this idea, for he writes that &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n has, on account of the kindness which has been shown by H.M. (Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r) to Ba&khbarb;tar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, been very gracious to him (Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n). Every day he has shown him more and more favour, keeps him beside him at nights, and recites to him durpats, which he (&ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n) has composed, and which he calls <hi>nauras</hi><note n=1>See Rieu, 741b, who calls the <hi>nauras</hi> a treatise on music composed by Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Shbarb;&amacr;h II. This &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Shbarb;&amacr;h was Firi&shbarb;ta&apos;s patron, and reigned till 1626. Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n is the dictionary-maker and friend of Sir T. Roe. The sentence about reporting the remainder of the facts seems to be an extract from his report. Mu&hdotb;ammad W&amacr;ri&sumlb;, in his continuation of the P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h-n&amacr;ma, B.M. MS. Add. 6556, p. 438, mentions, with reprobation, that &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Shbarb;&amacr;h had given his niece in marriage to a singer.</note> (Juvenilia). &ldquo;The remainder of the facts will be written on the day when I get my dismissal.&rdquo;

<p>In these days they brought a bird from the country of Z&imacr;rb&amacr;d (Sumatra, etc., Blochmann, p. 616) which was coloured like a parrot, but had a smaller body. One of its peculiarities is that it lays hold with its feet of the branch or perch on which they may have placed it and then makes a somersault, and remains in this position all night and whispers to itself. When day comes it seats itself on the top of the branch. Though they say that animals also have worship, yet it is most likely that this practice is instinctive. It never drinks water, and water acts like poison upon it, though other birds subsist on water.

<p>In the month<note n=2>Translated Elliot, vi, 339.</note> of Bahman there came pieces of good <pb id=pb273 n=273>news one after the other. The first was that the R&amacr;n&amacr; Amar Singh had elected for obedience and service to the Court. The circumstances of this affair are these. My son of lofty fortune, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram, by dint of placing a great many posts, especially in some places where most people said it was impossible to place them on account of the badness of the air and water and the wild nature of the localities, and by dint of moving the royal forces one after another in pursuit, without regard to the heat or excessive rain, and making prisoners of the families of the inhabitants of that region, brought matters with the R&amacr;n&amacr; to such a pass that it became clear to him that if this should happen to him again he must either fly the country or be made prisoner. Being without remedy, he chose obedience and loyalty, and sent to my fortunate son his maternal uncle, Subh Karan, with Harid&amacr;s Jh&amacr;l&amacr;, who was one of the men in his confidence, and petitioned that if that fortunate son would ask forgiveness for his offences and tranquillise his mind, and obtain for him the auspicious sign-manual,<note n=1>Lit. procure for him the sign of the blessed <hi>panja</hi> (five fingers). The sign-manual was that of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r. See below. See also Tod&apos;s Rajasthan, reprint, i, 411, for a representation of the <hi>panja</hi>; also p. 383, note id.</note> he would himself come and wait on my son, and would send his son and successor Karan to Court, or he, after the manner of other Rajas, would be enrolled amongst the servants of the Court and do service. He also begged that he himself might be excused from coming to Court on account of his old age. Accordingly my son sent them in company with his own Diwan Mull&amacr; &Shbarb;ukru-llah, whom after the conclusion of this business I dignified with the title of Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and Sundar D&amacr;s, his major-domo, who, after this matter was settled, was honoured with the title of R&amacr;y R&amacr;y&amacr;n, to the exalted Court, and represented the circumstances. My lofty <pb id=pb274 n=274>mind was always desirous, as far as possible, not to destroy the old families. The real point was that as R&amacr;n&amacr; Amar Singh and his fathers, proud in the strength of their hilly country and their abodes, had never seen or obeyed any of the kings of Hindustan, this should be brought about in my reign. At the request of my son I forgave the R&amacr;n&amacr;&apos;s offences, and gave a gracious farman that should satisfy him, and impressed on it the mark of my auspicious palm.<note n=1><hi>Panja mub&amacr;rak</hi> (Tod&apos;s Rajasthan, i, 383 and 411).</note> I also wrote a farman of kindness to my son that if he could arrange to settle the matter I should be much pleased. My son also sent them<note n=2>Perhaps the uncle and Harid&amacr;s, or the <hi>&imacr;nh&amacr;</hi>, &lsquo;them&rsquo; may mean the farman. See Elliot, vi, 340, which has &lsquo;my letters.&rsquo; Tod has translated this part of the T&umacr;zuk, i, 382.</note> with Mull&amacr; &Shbarb;ukru-llah and Sundar D&amacr;s to the R&amacr;n&amacr; to console him and make him hopeful of the royal favour. They gave him the gracious farman with the sign-manual of the auspicious hand, and it was settled that on Sunday, the 26th of the month of Bahman, he and his sons should come and pay their respects to my son. The second piece of good news was the death of Bah&amacr;dur, who was descended from the rulers of Gujarat, and was the leaven of disturbance and mischief (there). Almighty God had annihilated him in His mercy: he died of a natural illness. The third piece of news was the defeat of the Warz&amacr; (Portuguese Viceroy), who had done his best to take the castle and port of Surat. In the roadstead<note n=3>The text has <hi>&khbarb;aurmiy&amacr;n</hi>, and I. O. 181 has <hi>&khbarb;aur-i-bandar</hi>. <hi>&Khbarb;aur</hi> means a bay or gulf in Arabic. The battle is that between Captain Downton and the Portuguese, which took place in January, 1615, and is described in Orme&apos;s Hist., Fragments, p. 351, etc. See also Danvers&apos; &ldquo;Portuguese in India,&rdquo; ii. 170. The engagement was in the Swally channel.</note> of the port of Surat a fight took place between the English, who had taken shelter there, and the Viceroy. Most of his ships were burnt by the English fire. Being helpless he had not <pb id=pb275 n=275>the power to fight any more, and took to flight. He sent some one to Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was the governor of the ports of Gujarat, and knocked at the door of peace, and said that he had come to make peace and not to make war. It was the English who had stirred up the war. Another piece of news was that some of the Rajputs, who had determined to attack and kill &ayin;Ambar (misprinted &Ghbarb;&imacr;r), had made an ambush, and finding a good opportunity had gained access to him, when a slight wound had been inflicted on him by one of them. The men who were round &ayin;Ambar (again misprinted &Ghbarb;&imacr;r) had killed the Rajputs and taken &ayin;Ambar to his quarters. A very little<note n=1>Elliot, vi, 340. As Mr. Rogers remarks, the sentence is not easily intelligible. Probably the translation should be, &ldquo;No one remained (all the Rajputs having been killed) who could finish off Malik &ayin;Ambar.&rdquo;</note> more would have made an end of him. In the end of this month, when I was employed in hunting in the environs of Ajmir, Mu&hdotb;ammad Beg,<note n=2 id=n275.2>Probably the father or grandfather of the Mu&hdotb;ammad Beg &Zbarb;&umacr;-l-faq&amacr;r who was a servant of Aurangz&imacr;b (Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, ii, 89).</note> an attendant on my fortunate son Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram, came and brought a report from that son, and stated that the R&amacr;n&amacr; had come with his sons and paid his respects to the prince; &ldquo;the details would be made known by the report.&rdquo; I immediately turned the face of supplication to the Divine Court, and prostrated myself in thanksgiving. I presented a horse, an elephant, and a jewelled dagger to the aforesaid Mu&hdotb;ammad Beg, and honoured him with the title of &Zbarb;&umacr;-l-faq&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n.<ref target=n275.2 type=noteref>2</ref> From the report it appeared that on Sunday, the 26th Bahman, the R&amacr;n&amacr; paid his respects to my fortunate son with the politeness and ritual that servants pay their respects, and produced as offerings a famous large ruby that was in his house, with some decorated articles and seven elephants, some of them fit for the private stud, and which had not fallen into <pb id=pb276 n=276>our hands and were the only ones left him, and nine horses.

<p>My son also behaved to him with perfect kindness. When the R&amacr;n&amacr; clasped his feet and asked forgiveness for his faults, he took his head and placed it on his breast, and consoled him in such a manner as to comfort him. He presented him with a superb dress of honour, a jewelled sword, a horse with a jewelled saddle, and a private elephant with silver housings, and, as there were not more than 100 men with him who were worthy of complete robes of honour (<hi>sar u p&amacr;</hi>), he gave 100 sarupa and 50 horses and 12 jewelled <hi>khapwa</hi> (daggers). As it is the custom of the Zamindars that the son who is the heir-apparent should not go with his father to pay his respects to a king or prince, the R&amacr;n&amacr; observed this custom, and did not bring with him Karan, the son who had received the <hi>&tdotb;&imacr;k&amacr;</hi>. As the hour (fixed by astrology) of the departure of that son of lofty fortune from that place was the end of that same day, he gave him leave, so that, having himself gone, he might send Karan to pay his respects. After he had gone, Karan also came and did so. To him also he gave a superb dress of honour, a jewelled sword and dagger, a horse with a gold saddle, and a special elephant, and on the same day, taking Karan in attendance, he proceeded towards the illustrious Court. On the 3rd Isfand&amacr;rmu&zbarb; my return to Ajmir from hunting took place. From the 17th Bahman up to that date, during which I was hunting, one tigress with three cubs and thirteen nilgaw had been killed. The fortunate prince encamped on Saturday, the 10th of the same month, at the village of Devr&amacr;n&imacr;, which is near the city of Ajmir, and an order was given that all the Amirs should go to meet him, and that each should present an offering according to his standing and condition, and on the next day, Sunday, the 11th he should have the good fortune to wait upon me. The next <pb id=pb277 n=277>day the prince, with great magnificence, with all the victorious forces that had been appointed to accompany him on that service, entered the public palace. The hour for him to wait on me was when two watches and two gharis of the day had passed, and he had the good fortune to pay his respects, and performed his prostrations and salutations. He presented 1,000 ashrafis and 1,000 rupees by way of offering, 1,000 muhrs and 1,000 rupees by way of charity. I called that son forward and embraced him, and having kissed his head and face, favoured him with special kindnesses and greetings. When he had finished the dues of service and had presented his offerings and charities, he petitioned that Karan might be exalted with the good fortune of prostrating himself and paying his respects. I ordered them to bring him, and the Bakhshis with the usual ceremonies of respect produced him. After prostration and salutation were completed, at the request of my son &Khbarb;urram, I ordered them to place him in front on the right hand of the circle. After this I ordered &Khbarb;urram to go and wait on his mothers, and gave him a special dress of honour, consisting of a jewelled <hi>ch&amacr;rqab</hi> (sleeveless vest), a coat of gold brocade, and a rosary of pearls. After he had made his salutation, there were presented to him a special dress of honour, a special horse with a jewelled saddle, and a special elephant. I also honoured Karan with a superb robe of honour and a jewelled sword, and the Amirs and mansabdars had the honour of prostrating themselves and paying their respects, and presented their offerings. Each of these, according to his service and rank, was honoured with favours. As it was necessary to win the heart of Karan, who was of a wild nature and had never seen assemblies and had lived among the hills, I every day showed him some fresh favour, so that on the second day of his attendance a jewelled dagger, and on the next day a special Iraqi horse with jewelled saddle, were given <pb id=pb278 n=278>to him. On the day when he went to the darbar in the female apartments, there were given to him on the part of N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n Begam a rich dress of honour, a jewelled sword, a horse and saddle, and an elephant. After this I presented him with a rosary of pearls of great value. On the next day a special elephant with trappings (<hi>tal&amacr;yir</hi>) were given. As it was in my mind to give him something of every kind, I presented him with three hawks and three falcons, a special sword, a coat of mail, a special cuirass, and two rings, one with a ruby and one with an emerald. At the end of the month I ordered that all sorts of cloth stuffs, with carpets and cushions (named <hi>takiya</hi>) and all kinds of perfumes, with vessels of gold, two Gujrati carts, and cloths, should be placed in a hundred trays. The Ahadis carried them in their arms and on their shoulders to the public audience hall, where they were bestowed on him.

<p>&Sumlb;&amacr;bit &Khbarb;&amacr;n<note n=1>R.A.S. MS. has Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and so has I.O. MS. 181.</note> at the paradise-resembling assemblies was always addressing unbecoming speeches and making palpable allusions to I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah and his son &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n. Once or twice, showing my dislike of this, I had forbidden him to do so, but this was not enough for him. As I held very dear I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah&apos;s good-will towards me, and was very closely connected with his family, this matter became very irksome to me. As one night without reason and without motive he began to speak unpleasant words to him, and said them to such an extent that signs of vexation and annoyance became evident in I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah&apos;s face, I sent him next morning, in the custody of a servant of the Court, to &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n to say that as on the previous evening he had spoken unpleasant words to his father I handed him over to him, and he might shut him up either there or in the fort of Gwalior, as he pleased; until he <pb id=pb279 n=279>made amends to his father I would never forgive his fault. According to the order &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n sent him to Gwalior fort. In the same month Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n was promoted to an increased mansab, and was given that of 2,500 personal and 2,000 horse. A&hdotb;mad Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who is one of the old retainers of the State, committed some faults on the journey to the Subah of Kabul, and Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was the commander of the army, had repeatedly complained of his making himself disagreeable. Necessarily I summoned him to Court, and in order to punish him handed him over to Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n to confine him in the fort of Ran&tdotb;ambhor. Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Bengal, had sent two rubies as an offering, and they were laid before me. As I had made a rule that they should bring before me after two watches of the night had passed the dervishes and necessitous people who had collected in the illustrious palace, this year also after the same manner I bestowed on the dervishes with my own hand and in my own presence 55,000 rupees and 190,000 bighas of land, with fourteen entire villages, and twenty-six ploughs,<note n=1><hi>Qulba.</hi> It does not appear that this is a land-measure.</note> and 11,000 <hi>&khbarb;arw&amacr;r</hi><note n=2><hi>&Khbarb;arw&amacr;r.</hi> It is a weight. See Jarrett, ii, 394, where a kharwar is said to be equal to ten Hindustani maunds.</note> (ass-loads) of rice; I presented as well 732 pearls, of the value of 36,000 rupees, to the servants who by way of loyalty had bored their ears.

<p>At the end of the aforesaid month news came that when four and a half gharis of night had passed on Sunday the 11th of the month, in the city of Burhanpur, God Almighty had bestowed on Sult&amacr;n Parw&imacr;z a son by the daughter of Prince Mur&amacr;d. I gave him the name of Sult&amacr;n D&umacr;r-and&imacr;sh<note n=3>Probably this was the son who died in the 14th year (T&umacr;zuk, p. 282).</note> (long-thoughted).




<pb id=pb280 n=280>
<div1 id=yr10>
<head>The Tenth New Year&apos;s Festival after my auspicious Accession.</head>


<p>When 55 seconds had passed on Saturday, 1st Farward&imacr;n, in my 10th year, corresponding with the 8th<note n=1>Should be 18th. See Elliot, vi, 341. I.O. 181 has 20th, and this is probably correct, <hi>b&imacr;stam</hi> and <hi>ha&shbarb;tam</hi> being often mistaken for one another by the copyists. B.M. MS. Add. 26215 has <hi>d&umacr;&shbarb;amba</hi>, Monday, instead of <hi>&shbarb;amba</hi>, Saturday.</note> of the month of &Sdotb;afar (March, 1615), 1024 Hijra, the sun from the constellation of Pisces entered the house of honour of Aries. When three gharis had passed on the night of Sunday I seated myself on the throne of State. The New Year&apos;s feast and ceremonials were prepared in the usual manner. The illustrious princes, the great &Khbarb;&amacr;ns, the chief officers and Ministers of State made their salutations of congratulation. On the 1st of the month the mansab of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah was increased from 5,000 personal and 2,000 horse by 1,000 personal and horse. Special horses were given to the Kunwar Karan, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and R&amacr;ja B&imacr;r Singh Deo. On the 2nd the offering of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n was laid before me; it was an approved offering of jewels and jewelled ornaments and things of gold, of cloth stuffs of all kinds and descriptions and was looked over in detail. That which I approved was worth 85,000 rupees. On this day a jewelled sword with a belt and band(?) (<hi>band u b&amacr;r</hi>) was given to Karan, and an elephant to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n. As I had made up my mind to proceed to the Deccan, I gave an order to &ayin;Abdu-l-Kar&imacr;m Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r&imacr;, to go to Mandu and prepare a new building for my private residence and repair the buildings of the old kings. On the 3rd day the offerings of R&amacr;ja B&imacr;r Singh Deo were laid before me and one ruby, some pearls, and one elephant had the honour of being accepted. On the 4th day the mansab of Mustaf&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n was increased by 500 personal and 200 horse to 2,000 personal <pb id=pb281 n=281>and 250 horse. On the 5th I gave a standard and drums to I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah, and an order was given him to beat his drums. The mansab of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n was increased by 1,000 personal and horse to 4,000 personal and 2,000 horse, and having increased the mansab of R&amacr;ja B&imacr;r Singh Deo by 700 horse, I dismissed him to his own country, directing that he should present himself at Court at stated periods. On the same day the offering of Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n was laid before me. Some of all the kinds of things pleased me. Kishan Chand, of the sons of the Rajas of Nagarkot, was honoured with the title of Raja. On Thursday, the 6th, the offerings of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah were laid before me at Cha&shbarb;ma-i-N&umacr;r; a large meeting had been arranged, and by way of favour the whole of his offerings were inspected. Of the jewels and jewelled things and choice cloth stuffs the value of 100,000 rupees was accepted, and the remainder given back. On the 7th day I increased by 1,000 personal the mansab of Kishan Singh, which had been 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse. On this day a tiger was killed in the neighbourhood of Cha&shbarb;ma-i-N&umacr;r. On the 8th I gave Karan the mansab of 5,000 personal and horse, and gave him a small rosary of pearls and emeralds with a ruby in the centre which in the language of the Hindus is called <hi>smaran</hi> (Sanskrit for &lsquo;remembrance&rsquo;). I increased the mansab of Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n by 1,000 personal and 400 horse, so as to make it 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse, original and increase. The mansab of &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr; B&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg was increased by 300 horse, and that of R&amacr;ja &Shbarb;y&amacr;m Singh by 500 personal so as to make it 2,500 personal and 1,400 horse. On Sunday, the 9th, there was an eclipse of the sun when twelve gharis of the day had passed. It began from the west, and four out of five parts of the sun were eclipsed in the knot of the dragon. From the commencement of the seizure until it became light eight gharis elapsed. <pb id=pb282 n=282>Alms of all kinds, and things in the shape of metals, animals, and vegetables, were given to fakirs and the poor and people in need. On this day the offering of R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh was laid before me; what was taken was of the value of 43,000 rupees. The offering of Bah&amacr;dur &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the governor of Qandahar, was also laid before me on this day; its total value came to 14,000 rupees. Two watches of the night had passed on the night of Monday, the 29th &Sdotb;afar (30th March, 1615), in the ascension of Sagittarius, when a boy was born to B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram by the daughter of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n; I gave him the name of D&amacr;r&amacr; &Shbarb;uk&umacr;h. I hope that his coming will be propitious to this State conjoined with eternity, and to his fortunate father. The mansab of Sayyid &ayin;Al&imacr; B&amacr;rha was increased by 500 personal and 300 horse, so as to bring it to 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse. On the 10th the offering of I&ayin;tib&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n was laid before me, and what was of the value of 40,000 rupees was accepted. On this day the mansab of &Khbarb;usrau B&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg was raised by 300 horse, and that of Mangl&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n by 500 personal and 200 horse. On the 11th the offering of Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n was laid before me. Of it seven rubies, one rosary of pearls, and 270 other pearls were accepted, and their value was 145,000 rupees. On the 12th the offerings of M&imacr;rz&amacr; R&amacr;ja Bh&amacr;o Singh and R&amacr;wat &Shbarb;ankar were laid before me. On the 13th, out of the offering of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan, one <hi>qutb&imacr;</hi> (Egyptian?) ruby, one diamond, one string of pearls, five rings, four pearls, and some cloths, altogether the value of 32,000 rupees, were accepted. On the 14th the mansab of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan, which was 3,000 personal and 700 horse, was increased by 1,000 personal and 500 horse, and that of Waf&amacr;d&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, of 750 personal and 200 horse, by 2,000 personal and 1,200 horse. On the same day Mustaf&amacr; Beg, the ambassador of the ruler of Iran, had the good fortune to wait upon me. After <pb id=pb283 n=283>completing the matter of Gurjistan (Georgia), my exalted brother sent him with a letter consisting of expressions of friendship and assurances of sincerity, with several horses, camels, and some stuffs from Aleppo, which had come for that fortunate brother from the direction of R&umacr;m. Nine large European hunting dogs, for which a request had gone, were also sent by him.

<p>Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, on this day, obtained leave to go for the capture of the fort of K&amacr;ngra, the equal of which for strength they cannot point to in the hill country of the Panjab or even all the habitable world. From the time when the sound of Islam reached the country of Hindustan up to this auspicious time when the throne of rule has been adorned by this suppliant at the throne of Allah, none of the rulers or kings has obtained possession of it. Once in the time of my revered father, the army of the Panjab was sent against this fort, and besieged it for a long time. At length they came to the conclusion that the fort was not to be taken, and the army was sent off to some more necessary business. When he was dismissed, I gave Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n a private elephant with trappings. R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Mal, son of R&amacr;ja B&amacr;so, as his country was near that fort, was also appointed, and his previous mansab was increased by 500 personal and horse. R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh also came from his place and jagir and waited on me, and presented an offering of 100 ashrafis. On the 17th the offering of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam was laid before me. Two jewelled daggers, one rosary of pearls, some pieces of cloth, an elephant, and four Iraq horses were accepted, and the rest returned; their value was 15,000 rupees. On the same date the offering of I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, of the value of 18,000 rupees, was laid before me. On the 18th the offering of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n was inspected. Of jewels and cloth stuffs the value of 15,000 rupees was accepted. The mansab of I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which was 700 personal and 200 horse, I increased <pb id=pb284 n=284>by 800 personal and 300 horse, so that with original and increase it came to 1,500 personal and 500 horse. &Khbarb;usrau B&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg, who was one of the distinguished soldiers, died of the disease of dysentery. On the 8th day, which was Thursday, after two watches and four and a half gharis had passed, the <hi>&shbarb;araf</hi> (highest point of the sun&apos;s ascension) began. On this auspicious day I ascended the throne in happiness and prosperity, and the people saluted and congratulated me. When one watch of the day remained I went to the Cha&shbarb;ma-i-N&umacr;r. According to agreement the offering of Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n was laid before me at that place. He had arranged beautiful jewels and jewellery, with cloth stuff and articles of all kinds that were pleasing to me. Among these, a jewelled khapwa (dagger), which at his request the royal artificers had made, and the like of which in value there did not exist in my private treasury, was worth 100,000 rupees. In addition to this, jewels and other things of the value of 138,000 rupees were taken. Indeed, it was a splendid offering. To Mu&sdotb;&tumlb;af&amacr; Beg, the ambassador of the ruler of Iran, I gave 20,000 <hi>darab</hi>, or 10,000 rupees. On the 21st I sent robes of honour by the hand of &ayin;Abdu-l-&Ghbarb;af&umacr;r to fifteen of the Amirs of the Deccan. R&amacr;ja Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t obtained leave to go to his jagir, and a special shawl (<hi>parm narm</hi><note n=1>Akbar used the word <hi>parm narm</hi>, &lsquo;very soft,&rsquo; as a substitute for &lsquo;shawl&rsquo; (Blochmann, p. 90).</note>) was given to him. On the same day I gave a jewelled waist-dagger to Mu&sdotb;&tumlb;af&amacr; Beg, the ambassador. I increased the mansab of H&umacr;shang, the son of Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which was 1,000 personal and 500 horse, by 500 personal and 200 horse. On the 23rd, Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n was promoted to the Subah of Behar. Zafar &Khbarb;&amacr;n was ordered to present himself at Court. To the mansab of Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which was 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse, I added 500 personal and 1,000 horse. Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n on the same day was dismissed to his jagir, as well as <pb id=pb285 n=285>&Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr; B&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg, who was honoured with the title of &Umacr;zbeg &Khbarb;&amacr;n. Bah&amacr;duru-l-mulk, who belonged to the army of the Deccan and held the mansab of 2,500 personal and 2,100 horse received an increase of 500 personal and 200 horse. An increase of 200 was made in the mansab of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Taq&imacr;, which was 800 personal and 180 horse. On the 25th an increase of 200 horse was made in the rank of Sal&amacr;mu-llah, the Arab, so that it became 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse. I presented Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n with the black piebald horse out of my special horses which the ruler of Iran had sent me. At the end of the day of Thursday I went to the house of B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram and remained there till a watch of the night had passed. His second offering was laid before me on that day. On the first day he paid his respects he laid before me a celebrated ruby of the R&amacr;n&amacr;, which, on the day of his paying his respects, he had made an offering of to my son, and which the jewellers valued at 60,000 rupees. It was not worthy of the praise they had given it. The weight of this ruby was eight <hi>t&amacr;nk</hi>,<note n=1>According to Gladwin, 96 tanks = one sir. Four mashas make a tank, and a masha is about 18 grains troy.</note> and it was formerly in the possession of R&amacr;y Maldeo, who was the chief of the tribe of the R&amacr;&tdotb;hors and one of the chief rulers (or Rays) of Hindustan. From him it was transferred to his son Chandar Sen, who, in the days of his wretchedness and hopelessness, sold it to R&amacr;n&amacr; &Umacr;day Singh. From him it went to R&amacr;n&amacr; Part&amacr;p, and afterwards to this R&amacr;n&amacr; Amar Singh. As they had no more valuable gift in their family, he presented it on the day that he paid his respects to my fortunate son B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram, together with the whole of his stud of elephants, which, according to the Indian idiom, they call <hi>gheta ch&amacr;r.</hi><note n=2>Text <AR>k-hyt'h chAr</AR>, <hi>kheta ch&amacr;r</hi>. But the two B.M. MSS. which I have consulted have no <hi>y&amacr;</hi>, and have <hi>khatta</hi> or <hi>ghatta ch&amacr;r</hi>. I think that the word must be <HI>gha.taa</HI>, <hi>gha&tdotb;&amacr;</hi>, which in Sanskrit means a troop <pb>of elephants assembled for war. I am not sure what the word <hi>ch&amacr;r</hi> means, but perhaps it is only an affix. According to Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l a herd of (wild) elephants is called <hi>sahn</hi> (Blochmann, p. 122).</note> <pb id=pb286 n=286>I ordered them to engrave on the ruby that at the time of paying his respects R&amacr;n&amacr; Amar Singh had presented it as an offering to Sult&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram. On that day certain other things from among the offerings of B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram were accepted. Among them was a little crystal box of Frank work, made with great taste, with some emeralds, three rings, four Iraq horses, and various other things, the value of which was 80,000 rupees. On the day on which I went to his house he had prepared a great offering, in fact there were laid before me things and rarities worth about four or five lakhs of rupees. Of these the equivalent of 100,000 rupees was taken away and the balance given to him.

<p>On the 28th the mansab of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n, which was 3,000 personal and 1,800 horse, was increased by 500 personal and 400 horse. In the end of the month I presented Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n with a horse, a robe of honour, a jewelled dagger, a standard and drums, and dismissed him to the province of Behar. The office of <hi>&ayin;ar&zdotb;-mukarrir</hi> (reviser of petitions), that belonged to &Khbarb;w&amacr;jag&imacr; &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr; Muhammad, as he had died, I gave to Mu&khbarb;li&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was in my confidence. Three hundred horse were increased in the mansab of Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who now had 1,000 personal and horse. As the hour of the leave-taking of Kunwar Karan was at hand, I was desirous of showing him my skill in shooting with a gun. Just at this time the <hi>qar&amacr;wul&amacr;n</hi> (shikaris) brought in news of a tigress. Though it is an established custom of mine only to hunt male tigers, yet, in consideration that no other tiger might be obtained before his departure, I went for the tigress. I took with me Karan, and said to him that I would hit it wherever he wished me to do so. After this arrangement I went to the place where they had <pb id=pb287 n=287>marked down the tiger. By chance there was a wind and disturbance in the air, and the female elephant on which I was mounted was terrified of the tigress and would not stand still. Notwithstanding these two great obstacles to shooting, I shot straight towards her eye. God Almighty did not allow me to be ashamed before that prince, and, as I had agreed, I shot her in the eye. On the same day Karan petitioned me for a special gun, and I gave him a special Turkish one.

<p>As on the day for his departure I had not given Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n an elephant, I now gave him a special elephant, and I also sent an elephant to Bah&amacr;duru-l-mulk and one to Waf&amacr;d&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the 8th Urd&imacr;bihi&shbarb;t the assemblage for my lunar weighing was held, and I weighed myself against silver and other things, distributing them amongst the deserving and needy. Naw&amacr;zi&shbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n took leave to go to his jagir, which was in Malwa. On the same day I gave an elephant to &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan. On the 9th they brought &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, who had come to Agra from the fort of Gwalior, and who had been sent for. Though he had been guilty of many offences, and in all that I had done to him I was right, yet when they brought him into my presence and my eye fell on him, I perceived more shame in myself than in him. Having pardoned all his offences, I gave him the shawl I had round my waist. I gave Kunwar Karan 100,000 <hi>darab</hi>. On the same day R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh brought a large elephant of the name of Ran-r&amacr;wat, which was a celebrated elephant of his, as an offering. In fact, it was such a rare elephant that I put it into my private stud. On the 10th the offering of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n, which he sent me from Agra by the hand of his son, was laid before me. It was of all kinds of things, of the value of 40,000 rupees. On the 12th the offering of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n, which consisted of forty-five<note n=1><hi>Panj tuq&umacr;z</hi>, i.e. 9 by 5. The text has <AR>tAqUr</AR>, <hi>t&amacr;q&umacr;r</hi>.</note> horse <pb id=pb288 n=288>two strings of camels, Arabian dogs (greyhounds), and hunting animals (hawks?), was brought before me. On the same day seven other elephants from R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh were also brought to me as an offering, and were placed in my private stud. Ta&hdotb;ayyur &Khbarb;&amacr;n, after he had been in attendance on me for four months, to-day got leave to go. A message was sent to &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n. I impressed on him the profit and loss of friendship and enmity, and made an agreement (with Ta&hdotb;ayyur &Khbarb;&amacr;n) that all these words should be repeated to &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and he should bring him back to the path of loyalty and obedience. At the time of his taking leave I also bestowed on him certain things. On the whole, in this short time, what with the gifts bestowed on him by me privately, by the princes, and those given him by the Amirs according to order, the account mounted up to about 100,000 rupees that he had received. On the 14th the rank and reward of my son &Khbarb;urram were fixed. His mansab had been one of 12,000 personal and 6,000 horse, and that of his brother (Parw&imacr;z) 15,000 personal and 8,000 horse. I ordered his mansab to be made equal with that of Parw&imacr;z, besides other rewards. I gave him a private elephant of the name of Panch&imacr; Gaj,<note n=1>The B.M. MSS. seem to have <hi>panch kunjar</hi>, &lsquo;five elephants,&rsquo; i.e. equal to five elephants(?).</note> with accoutrements of the value of 12,000 rupees. On the 16th an elephant was given to Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the 17th the mansab of R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh, which was 4,000 personal and 3,000 horse, was increased by 1,000, and it was raised to 5,000. At the request of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n the mansab of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f, which was 500 personal and 200 horse, was raised by 200, and it was ordered to be 1,000 personal and 400 horse. &ayin;Abdu-llah, the son of &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, who was imprisoned in the fort of Ran&tdotb;ambhor, was sent for at the request of his father. He came to the Court, and <pb id=pb289 n=289>I took the chains off his legs and sent him to his father&apos;s house. On the 24th, R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh presented me with another elephant, called Fauj-sang&amacr;r (&lsquo;ornament of the army&rsquo;), by way of offering. Although this is also a good elephant, and has been placed in my private stud, it is not to be compared with the first elephant (he sent), which is one of the wonders of the age, and is worth 20,000 rupees. On the 26th, 200 personal were added to the mansab of Bad&imacr;&ayin;u-z-zam&amacr;n, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;; it was 700 personal and 500 horse. On the same day &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Zainu-d-d&imacr;n, who is of the Naq&shbarb;band&imacr; &Khbarb;w&amacr;jas, came from M&amacr;war&amacr;&hamza;a-n-nahr and waited on me, bringing as an offering eighteen horses. Qizilb&amacr;&shbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was one of the auxiliaries of the province of Gujarat, had come to Court without the leave of the governor. I ordered that an ahadi should put him into confinement, and that he be sent back to the governor of Gujarat, so that others might not desire to do the same. The mansab of Mub&amacr;rak &Khbarb;&amacr;n Saz&amacr;wal I raised 500 personal, so that it should be 1,500 personal and 700 horse. On the 29th I gave &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am 100,000 rupees, and ordered that the parganahs of D&amacr;sna<note n=1 id=n300.1>In Sark&amacr;r Delhi (Jarrett, ii, 287).</note> and K&amacr;sna,<ref target=n300.1 type=noteref>1</ref> which are equivalent to 5,000 personal, should be made his jagir. At the end of the same month I gave leave to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, with his brothers and other relatives, to go to Allahabad, which had been appropriated to them as jagir. At this meeting twenty horse, a <hi>qab&amacr;</hi> (<hi>parm narm</hi>) of Cashmere cloth, twelve deer, and ten Arabian dogs were given to Karan. The next day, which was the 1st &Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;d, forty horse, the next day forty-one horse, and the third day twenty, amounting in the space of three days to 101 head, were given as a present to Kunwar Karan. In return for the elephant Fauj-sang&amacr;r, an elephant worth 10,000 rupees out of <pb id=pb290 n=290>my private stud was presented to R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh. On the 5th of the month ten turbans (<hi>ch&imacr;ra</hi>), ten coats (<hi>qaba</hi>), and ten waist-bands were given to Karan. On the 20th I gave him another elephant.

<p>In these days the news-writer of Kashmir had written that a Mull&amacr; of the name of Gad&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;, a disciplined dervish, who for forty years had lived in one of the monasteries of the city, had prayed the inheritors of that monastery two years<note n=1>The text does not expressly say that the dervish foretold two years before his death the period of his death, but apparently Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r means this, for he goes on to speak of the time mentioned for his delivery. See also Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 81, where the dervish is called &Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb;, and where it is added that the whole population of Srinagar followed the bier.</note> before he was to deliver over the pledge of his life that he might select a corner in that monastery as a place for his burial. They said, &ldquo;Let it be so.&rdquo; In short, he selected a place. When the time for his delivery came he informed his friends and relations and those who were dear to him that an order had reached him that, delivering over the pledge (of life) he had, he should turn towards the last world. Those who were present wondered at his words, and said that the prophets had no such information, and how could they believe such words? He said, &ldquo;Such an order has been given to me.&rdquo; He then turned to one of his confidants, who was of the sons of the Q&amacr;&zdotb;&imacr;s of the country, and said: &ldquo;You will expend the price<note n=2>Lit. give it, for the Koran cannot be directly sold.</note> of my Koran, which is worth 700 tankas, in carrying me (to the grave). When you hear the call to Friday&apos;s prayer you will enquire for me.&rdquo; This conversation took place on the Thursday, and he divided all the goods in his room among his acquaintance and disciples, and went, and at end of the day bathed at the baths. The Q&amacr;&zdotb;&imacr;-z&amacr;da aforesaid came before the call for prayer, and enquired as to the health of the Mull&amacr;. When he came to the door of the cell <pb id=pb291 n=291>he found the door closed and a servant sitting there. He asked the slave what had happened, and the servant said, &ldquo;The Mull&amacr; has enjoined me that until the door of the cell open of its own accord I must not go in.&rdquo; Shortly after these words were said the door of the cell opened. The Q&amacr;&zdotb;&imacr;-z&amacr;da entered the cell with that servant and saw that the Mull&amacr; was on his knees with his face turned toward the qibla, and had given up his soul to God. Happy the state of the freed who can fly away from this place of the snares of dependence with such ease!

<p>By the increase of 200 personal and 50 horse in the mansab of Karam Sen R&amacr;&tdotb;hor, I raised it to 1,000 personal and 300 horse. On the 11th of this month the offering of La&shbarb;kar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which consisted of three strings of Persian camels and twenty cups and plates from &Khbarb;i&tumlb;&amacr; (China) and twenty Arabian dogs, was brought before me. On the 12th a jewelled dagger was bestowed on I&ayin;tib&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and to Karan I gave a plume (<hi>kalg&imacr;</hi>) worth 2,000 rupees. On the 14th I gave a dress of honour to Sar-<note n=1>Text <hi>pisar</hi>, &lsquo;son of Buland R&amacr;y.&rsquo; but from the B.M. MSS. it appears that <hi>pisar</hi> is a mistake for Sar.</note>buland R&amacr;y, and gave him leave to go to the Deccan.

<p>On the night of Friday, the 15th, a strange affair occurred. By chance on that night I was at Pushkar. To be brief, Ki&shbarb;an, own brother to R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh, was in great perturbation through Gobind D&amacr;s, the Vakil of the said Raja having some time ago killed his nephew, a youth of the name of Gop&amacr;l D&amacr;s. The cause of the quarrel it would take too long to tell. Ki&shbarb;an Singh expected that, as Gop&amacr;l D&amacr;s was also the nephew of the Raja (S&umacr;raj Singh), the latter would kill Gobind D&amacr;s. But the Raja, on account of the experience and ability of Gobind D&amacr;s, relinquished the idea of seeking revenge for his nephew&apos;s death. When Ki&shbarb;an saw this neglect on the part of the Raja, he resolved himself to take <pb id=pb292 n=292>revenge for his nephew, and not allow his blood to pass away unnoticed. For a long time he kept this matter in his mind, until on that night he assembled his brothers, friends, and servants, and told them that he would go that night to take Gobind D&amacr;s&apos;s life, whatever might happen, and that he did not care what injury might happen to the Raja. The Raja was in ignorance of what was happening, and when it was near dawn Ki&shbarb;an came with Karan, his brother&apos;s son, and other companions. When he arrived at the gate of the Raja&apos;s dwelling he sent some of the experienced men on foot to the house of Gobind D&amacr;s, which was near the Raja&apos;s. He himself (Ki&shbarb;an) was on horseback, and stationed himself near the gate. The men on foot entered Gobind D&amacr;s&apos;s house, and killed some of those who were there on guard. Whilst this fight was going on Gobind D&amacr;s awoke, and seizing his sword in a state of bewilderment was coming out from one side of the house to join the outside watchmen. When the men on foot had finished killing some of the people, they came out of the tent to endeavour to find out Gobind D&amacr;s, and, meeting him, they finished his affair (killed him). Before the news of the killing of Gobind D&amacr;s reached Ki&shbarb;an, he, unable to bear it any more, dismounted and came inside the dwelling. Although his men protested in a disturbed state that it was not right to be on foot, he would in no way listen to them. If he had remained a little longer and the news of his enemy having been killed had reached him, it is possible that he would have escaped safe and sound, mounted as he was. As the pen of destiny had gone forth after another fashion, as soon as he alighted and went in, the Raja, who was in his <hi>ma&hdotb;all</hi> (female apartment), awoke at the uproar among the people, and stood at the gate of his house with his sword drawn. People from all sides were aroused and came in against the men who were on foot. They saw what the number <pb id=pb293 n=293>of men on foot was, and came out in great numbers and faced Ki&shbarb;an Singh&apos;s men, who were about ten in number. In short, Ki&shbarb;an Singh and his nephew Karan, when they reached the Raja&apos;s house, were attacked by these men and both of them killed. Ki&shbarb;an Singh had seven and Karan nine wounds. Altogether in this fight 66 men on the two sides were killed, on the Raja&apos;s side 30 and on Ki&shbarb;an Singh&apos;s 36. When the sun rose and illumined the world with its light, this business was revealed, and the Raja saw that his brother, his nephew, and some of his servants, whom he considered dearer than himself, were killed, and the whole of the rest had dispersed to their own places. The news reached me in Pushkar, and I ordered them to burn those who were killed, according to their rites, and inform me of the true circumstances of the affair. In the end it became clear that the affair had happened in the manner in which it has been written here, and that no further enquiry was necessary.

<p>On the 8th M&imacr;r&amacr;n &Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n came from his native place and waited on me with an offering of 100 muhrs. R&amacr;y S&umacr;raj Singh was dismissed to his duty in the Deccan. I presented him with a couple of pearls for his ears and a special Kashmir shawl (<hi>parm narm</hi>). A pair of pearls were also sent to &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n. On the 25th I increased the mansab of I&ayin;tib&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n by 600 horse, so as to bring it to 5,000 personal and 2,000 horse. On the same day Karan obtained leave to go to his jagir. He received a present of a horse, a special elephant, a dress of honour, a string of pearls of the value of 50,000 rupees, and a jewelled dagger which had been completed for 2,000 rupees. From the time of his waiting on me till he obtained leave, what he had had in the shape of cash, jewellery, jewels, and jewelled things was of the value of 200,000 rupees, with 110 horses, five elephants, in addition to what my son &Khbarb;urram bestowed on him <pb id=pb294 n=294>at various times. I gave Mub&amacr;rak &Khbarb;&amacr;n Saz&amacr;wal a horse and an elephant, and appointed him to accompany him. I sent several verbal messages to the R&amacr;n&amacr;. R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh also obtained leave to go to his native country, with a promise to return in two months. On the 27th, P&amacr;yanda &Khbarb;&amacr;n Mo&ghbarb;ul,<note n=1>Blochmann, p. 387. Possibly he was the part author of a translation of B&amacr;bar&apos;s Commentaries.</note> who was one of the old Amirs of the State, gave up the deposit of his life.

<p>At the end of this month news came that the ruler of Iran had executed his eldest son &Sdotb;af&imacr; M&imacr;rz&amacr;. This was a cause of great bewilderment. When I enquired into it they said that at Dara&shbarb;,<note n=2>The name is wrong. The Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 84, has Ra&shbarb;t (Ra&shbarb;d), which is a well-known town on the Caspian.</note> which is one of the noted cities of G&imacr;l&amacr;n, he ordered a slave of the name of Bihb&umacr;d to kill &Sdotb;af&imacr; M&imacr;rz&amacr;. The slave found an opportunity, early in the morning on the 5th of Mu&hdotb;arram, in the year 1024 (25th January, 1615), when the M&imacr;rz&amacr; was returning from the baths towards his house, and finished his affair for him with two wounds from a sword (<hi>s&imacr;&khbarb;ak&imacr;</hi>).<note n=3>According to the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma the true reading is sanjak&imacr; (see p. 84). But Olearius, who gives a full account of the murder (p. 352 of English translation, ed. 1662), says Bihb&umacr;d gave him two stabs with a <hi>chentze</hi>, which is a kind of poniard.</note> After a great part of the day had passed, while his body lay between the water and the mud, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Bah&amacr;&hamza;u-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad, who was the best known man in the country for learning and holiness, and on whom the Shah had full reliance, reported the affair, and, obtaining leave to lift him up, took his corpse and sent it to Ardab&imacr;l, where was the burial-ground of his ancestors. Although much enquiry was made of travellers from Iran, no one would say a word of this affair that satisfied my mind with regard to it. The killing of a son must have some powerful motive in order to do away with the disgrace of it.

<pb id=pb295 n=295><p>On the 1st of the month of T&imacr;r I gave an elephant of the name of Ranj&imacr;t with its trappings to M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam and another to Sayyid Al&imacr; B&amacr;rha. M&imacr;rak &Hdotb;usain, a relation of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &Shbarb;amsu-d-d&imacr;n, was appointed bakhshi and news-writer of the Subah of Behar, and took leave to go. I gave &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f Q&umacr;&shbarb;-beg&imacr; (the falconer) an elephant and a dress of honour, and dismissed him to his jagir. On the 9th of the same month I gave a jewelled sword to &Khbarb;&amacr;n Dauran, and a jewelled dagger was sent for Allahd&amacr;d, the son of Jal&amacr;l&amacr; the Afghan, who had become loyal. On the 13th took place the meeting for the festival of the <hi>&Amacr;b-p&amacr;&shbarb;&amacr;n</hi><note n=1>A Persian festival in memory of a rain which fell on the 13th T&imacr;r and put an end to a famine (Bah&amacr;r-i-&ayin;ajam).</note> (rose-water scattering), and the servants of the Court amused themselves with sprinkling rose-water over each other. On the 17th, Am&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n was appointed to the port of Cambay. As Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n proposed to come to Court, the (charge of the) aforesaid port was changed. On the same day I sent a jewelled waist-dagger to my son Parw&imacr;z. On the 18th the offering of &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n was laid before me. He had prepared all kinds of jewellery and other things, jewels with jewelled things, such as three rubies and 103 pearls, 100 rubies (<hi>y&amacr;q&umacr;t</hi>), two jewelled daggers and an aigrette adorned with rubies and pearls, a jewelled water-jar, a jewelled sword, a quiver bound with velvet, and a diamond ring, altogether of the value of about 100,000 rupees, in addition to jewels and jewelled things, cloth from the Deccan and Carnatic, and all kinds of gilt and plain things, with fifteen elephants and a horse whose mane reached the ground. The offering of &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n (his son) also, consisting of five elephants, 300 pieces of all kinds of cloth, was brought before me. On the 8th I honoured H&umacr;&shbarb;ang with the title of Ikr&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n. R&umacr;z-afz&umacr;n, who was one of the princes of the Subah of Behar and who had <pb id=pb296 n=296>been from his youth one of the permanent servants of the Court, having been honoured by admission into Islam, was made Raja of the province of his father, R&amacr;ja Sangr&amacr;m.<note n=1>Sangr&amacr;m was Raja of Khurkpur in Behar, and was killed in battle with Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n (Blochmann, p. 446, note).</note> Though the latter had been killed in opposing the leaders of the State, I gave him an elephant and leave to go to his native place. An elephant was presented to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the 24th, Jagat Singh, son of Kunwar Karan, who was in his 12th year, came and waited on me, and presented petitions from his grandfather, the R&amacr;n&amacr; Amar Singh, and from his father. The signs of nobility and high birth were evident on his face. I pleased him with a dress of honour and kindness. To the mansab of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;&Imacr;s&amacr; Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n an addition of 200 personal was made, so that it attained to 1,200 personal and 300 horse. In the end of the month, having honoured &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;usain Roh&imacr;la with the title of Mub&amacr;riz &Khbarb;&amacr;n, I dismissed him to his jagir. Ten thousand darabs (5,000 rupees) were given to the relations of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;arafu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain K&amacr;&shbarb;&ghbarb;ar&imacr;, who at this time had come and had the honour of kissing the threshold. On the 5th Amurd&amacr;d, to the mansab of R&amacr;ja Nathmal, which was 1,500 personal and 1,100 horse, an addition of 500 personal and 100 horse was made. On the 7th, Ke&shbarb;o (D&amacr;s) M&amacr;r&umacr;, who had a jagir in the Sarkar of Orissa, and who had been sent for to Court on account of a complaint<note n=2><hi>&Shbarb;akw&amacr;&hamza;i-&sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ib-i-S&umacr;ba.</hi> I presume it means a complaint against the governor, and perhaps one made by Ke&shbarb;o.</note> against the governor of the Subah of that place, came and paid his respects. He produced as an offering four elephants. As I had a great desire to see my <hi>farzand</hi> (son) &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n (Lod&imacr;), and for the purpose of enquiring into important matters connected with the Deccan, it was necessary for him to come at once, I sent for him. On Tuesday, the 8th of the same <pb id=pb297 n=297>month, he waited on me, and presented as an offering 1,000 muhrs, 1,000 rupees, 4 rubies, 20 pearls, 1 emerald, and a jewelled <hi>ph&umacr;l ka&tdotb;&amacr;ra</hi>, the total value being 50,000 rupees. On the night of Sunday, as it was the anniversary of the great &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja (Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n), I went to his revered mausoleum, and remained there till midnight. The attendants and Sufis exhibited ecstatic states, and I gave the fakirs and attendants money with my own hand; altogether there were expended 6,000 rupees in cash, 100 <hi>&sumlb;aub-kurta</hi> (a robe down to the ankles), 70 rosaries of pearls,<note n=1>The pearls are omitted in the MSS.</note> coral and amber, etc. Mah&amacr; Singh, grandson of R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh, was honoured with the title of Raja, and a standard and drums given him. On the 16th an Iraq horse out of my private stable and another horse were presented to Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the 19th an elephant was given to &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am. On the 20th, 200 horse were added to the mansab of Ke&shbarb;o (D&amacr;s) M&amacr;r&umacr;, which was 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse, and he was dignified with a dress of honour. An increase of 200 personal and horse was made to the mansab of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &ayin;&Amacr;qil, which was 1,200 personal and 600 horse. On the 22nd, Mirz&amacr; R&amacr;ja Bh&amacr;o Singh took leave to go to Amber, which was his ancient native place, and had given him a special Kashmir <hi>ph&umacr;p</hi> (?) robe.<note n=2>It is <hi>ph&umacr;l</hi> in MS. No. 181.</note> On the 25th, A&hdotb;mad Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was imprisoned at Ran&tdotb;ambhor, paid his respects to me, and his offences were pardoned on account of his former services. On the 28th, Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n came from the Subah of Gujarat and waited on me, and offered an aigrette and a jewelled throne.<note n=3><hi>Ta&khbarb;t&imacr;</hi>, qu. a signet? No. 181 has a <hi>l&amacr;l ta&khbarb;t&imacr;</hi>.</note> An increase of 500 personal and horse was made to the mansab of Sal&amacr;amu-llah, the Arab, and it was brought to 2,000 personal and 1,100 horse. On the 1st of the month of &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war the following increases were made <pb id=pb298 n=298>in the rank of a number of men who were going on service to the Deccan:&mdash;To Mub&amacr;riz &Khbarb;&amacr;n 300 horse, making 1,000 personal and horse. N&amacr;hir &Khbarb;&amacr;n was also raised to 1,000 personal and horse. Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n was raised by 300 horse to 2,500 personal and horse. Mangl&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s rank was increased by 200 horse to 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse. Girdhar, the son of Ray S&amacr;l, had the rank of 800 personal and horse bestowed on him, and Ilf &Khbarb;&amacr;n Qiy&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n the same mansab, original and increase. Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &Hdotb;usain was raised to 700 personal and 500 horse, and Kam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n, son of &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, to the same mansab. One hundred and fifty horse were added to the rank of Sayyid &ayin;Abdu-llah B&amacr;rha, which then came to 700 personal and 300 horse, original and increase. On the 8th of the said month I bestowed one N&umacr;r-jah&amacr;n&imacr; muhr, which is equal to 6,400 rupees, on Mu&sdotb;&tumlb;af&amacr; Beg, the ambassador of the ruler of Iran, and presented five cheetahs to Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Bengal. M&imacr;rz&amacr; Mur&amacr;d, eldest son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam, on the 12th of the same month was honoured with the title of Iltif&amacr;t &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the night of the 16th, corresponding with the <hi>&Shbarb;ab-i-bar&amacr;t</hi> (consecrated to the memory of forefathers), I ordered them to light lamps on the hills round the &Amacr;n&amacr; S&amacr;gar tank and on its banks, and went myself to look at them. The reflection of the lamps fell on the water and had a wonderful appearance. I passed the most of that night with the ladies of the mahall on the bank of that tank.

<p>On the 17th, M&imacr;rz&amacr; Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain,<note n=1>Sir Thomas Roe&apos;s friend.</note> who had gone as an ambassador to Bijapur, came and waited on me, and presented three rings, the stone of one of which was a cornelian from Yemen, of great beauty and pureness of water, the like of which is seldom seen among the cornelians of Yemen. &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n sent a person of the name of Sayyid Kab&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n on his own part with the said <pb id=pb299 n=299>Mir, and forwarded as offerings elephants with gold and silver fittings, Arab horses, jewels and jewelled things, and all kinds of cloth made in that country. On the 24th of this month they were brought before me with a letter he had brought. On the same day the assembly for my solar weighing was held. On the 26th, Mu&sdotb;&tumlb;af&amacr; Beg, the ambassador, took his leave. In addition to what had been bestowed on him during the time of his attendance, I gave him 20,000 rupees more in cash and a dress of honour, and in answer to the letter he had brought sent a friendly letter written in the perfection of friendship. On the 4th of the month of Mihr the mansab of M&imacr;r Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain, which was 2,000 personal and 500 horse, was fixed at 4,000 personal and 2,000 horse. On the 5th, Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, in company with &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n, who had been appointed to serve in the Deccan, at the hour that had been appointed for him, took his leave; he was honoured with a dress of honour, a jewelled dagger, a <hi>ph&umacr;l ka&tdotb;&amacr;ra</hi>, a special sword, and an elephant. On the 8th, &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n took his leave, and I presented him with a dress of honour, and a special <hi>n&amacr;dir&imacr;</hi> (a dress), and an ambling horse with a saddle, a special elephant, and a special sword. On the same date 1,700 horse of those under the command of Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n were ordered to have assignments (<hi>tan&khbarb;w&amacr;h</hi>) for two or three horses given them. The whole of the men who were at this time appointed for service in the Deccan were 330 mansabdars, 3,000 ahadis, 700 horse from the &Umacr;ymaqs, and 3,000 Dalaz&amacr;k Afghans. Altogether there were 30,000<note n=1>Text wrongly has 3 instead of 30.</note> cavalry, and 3,000,000 rupees of treasure, and an efficient artillery, and war elephants. They proceeded on this duty<corr>.</corr> The mansab of Sarbuland R&amacr;y was increased by 500 personal and 260 horse, and came to 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse. B&amacr;lj&umacr;, nephew of Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, was <pb id=pb300 n=300>promoted to the mansab of 1,000 personal and 700 horse, original and increase. I also increased R&amacr;ja Ki&shbarb;an D&amacr;s&apos;s mansab by 500. At the request of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n, the mansab of &Shbarb;&amacr;hb&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n Lod&imacr;, who belonged to the Deccan force, was fixed, original and increase, at 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse; and 200 horse were added to the mansab of Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n. The mansab of Suhr&amacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam, was fixed at 1,000 personal and 400 horse, original and increase. On the 14th of the same month 1,000 was added to the mansab of M&imacr;r Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain, and by increasing it also by 500 horse he was raised to the exalted rank of 5,000 personal and 2,500 horse. On the 19th, R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh, with his son Gaj Singh, who had gone home, came and paid their respects, and presented as offerings 100 muhrs and 1,000 rupees. I gave Sayyid Kab&imacr;r, who had been sent by &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, one N&umacr;rjah&amacr;n&imacr; muhr, which weighed 500 <hi>t&umacr;lcha</hi>. On the 23rd, ninety elephants of those which Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n had acquired from the conquest of the country of K&umacr;ch (Behar), and the conquest of the Maghs and the zamindars of Orissa, were brought before me and placed in the special elephant houses. On the 26th, Ir&amacr;dat &Khbarb;&amacr;n was raised to the rank of M&imacr;r-s&amacr;m&amacr;n&imacr; (head butler), Mu&ayin;tamad &Khbarb;&amacr;n to that of Bakhshi of the Ahadis, Mu&hdotb;ammad Ri&zdotb;&amacr; J&amacr;bir&imacr; to that of Bakhshi of the Subah of the Panjab and news writer of that place. Sayyid Kab&imacr;r, who had come on the part of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n to beg pardon for the offences of the rulers (<hi>duny&amacr;-d&amacr;r&amacr;n</hi>) of the Deccan, and to promise the restoration of the fort of Ahmadnagar and the royal territory which had been taken out of the possession of the chiefs of the victorious State through the rebellion of certain rebels, came and waited on me, and obtained leave to go on this date; and, having received a dress of honour, an elephant, and a horse, started off. As R&amacr;ja R&amacr;j Singh Kachhw&amacr;ha had died in the Deccan, I promoted his son R&amacr;m D&amacr;s <pb id=pb301 n=301>to the mansab of 1,000 personal and 400 horse. On the 4th of &Amacr;b&amacr;n, drums were given to Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n B&amacr;rha and his mansab increased by 300 horse, so as to bring it up to 3,000 personal and 2,000 horse. On the same date I released R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n, who was in confinement in the fort of Gwalior, on the security of Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and, confirming his mansab, sent him to the said &Khbarb;&amacr;n for duty at the fort of K&amacr;ngra. At the request of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n, an increase of 300 horse was ordered to the mansab of &Sdotb;&amacr;diq &Khbarb;&amacr;n, raising it to 1,000 personal and horse. M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;&Imacr;s&amacr; Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n came from the province of Sambhal, which was his jagir, and waited on me, and offered 100 muhrs. On the 16th, R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh obtained leave to go to his duty in the Deccan, and I increased his mansab by 300 horse, so as to make it 5,000 personal and 3,300 horse; he received a dress of honour and a horse, and started. On the 18th I confirmed the mansab of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;&Imacr;s&amacr;, original and increase, at 1,500 personal and 800 horse, and gave him an elephant and a dress of honour, and he took leave to go to the Deccan.

<p>On the same day the news of the death of the wretch Ch&imacr;n Qil&imacr;j was received by a letter from Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n. After the death of Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was one of the old servants of this State, I had made this inauspicious man an Am&imacr;r, and shown him great favour, and given him in jagir such a place as Jaunpur. I also sent his other brothers and relations with him and made them his deputies. He had one brother of the name of Lahor&imacr;,<note n=1>Apparently because born in Lahore (see Blochmann, p. 500).</note> of a very wicked disposition. It was reported to me that the servants of God (people) were greatly oppressed by his conduct. I sent an ahadi to bring him (Lahor&imacr;) from Jaunpur. At the coming of the ahadi, suspicion without any cause prevailed over Ch&imacr;n Qil&imacr;j, and it came into his mind to run away, taking <pb id=pb302 n=302>his misguided brother with him. Leaving his mansab, his government, place, and jagir, money, property, children, and people, he took a little money and gold and a few jewels and went with a small body among the zamindars. This news arrived a few days ago and caused great astonishment. In short, to whatever zamindar he went he took money<note n=1>According to I.O. MS. 181 every zamindar took some money from Ch&imacr;n Qil&imacr;j and sent him out of his estate, and this seems to be the probable meaning, for we are told later on that the zamindars plundered Ch&imacr;n Qil&imacr;j.</note> from him(?) and then let him go(?), until news came that he had entered the country of Johat.<note n=2>Tirhut. R.A.S. MS. has &ldquo;It chanced that the zamindar of this place was with Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr;, and the latter sent him with some people to seize Ch&imacr;n Qil&imacr;j.&rdquo; I.O. MS. has the same, and this seems correct. The text has &ldquo;It chanced that the zamindar of that place was spending some days in that neighbourhood(?).&rdquo; Perhaps a negative has been omitted before &lsquo;spending.&rsquo; I.O. MS. seems to have Johirhat as the name of the zamindar&apos;s estate.</note> When this news reached Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, he sent some of his men to take and bring that thoughtless one. They took him as soon as they arrived, and were intending to take him to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, when he at that very moment went to hell. Some of those who had accompanied him said that for some days previously he had contracted an illness and it had killed him. But this was heard of him as well, that he committed suicide, in order that they might not take him to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n in this state. In any case, they brought his body with his children and servants who were with him to Allahabad. They made away with most of the money that he had, and the zamindars took it from him. Alas, that salt (i.e. loyalty) should not have brought such black-faced wretches to condign punishment!


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Behind the duty that lies on all people is the duty to the sovereign and benefactor&rdquo;(?).<note n=3>Apparently the verse is quoted with reference to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr;&apos;s failure to exact retribution from the zamindars, There is an account of Ch&imacr;n Qil&imacr;j in the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, iii, 351.</note>
</lg>


<pb id=pb303 n=303><p>On the 22nd, at the request of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n, 200 horse were added to the mansab of N&amacr;d &ayin;Al&imacr; Maid&amacr;n&imacr;, one of the officers appointed to Banga&shbarb;, which brought it to 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse; 100 horse were also added to the mansab of La&shbarb;kar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which was 2,000 personal and 900 horse. On the 24th I confirmed the mansab of Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which was 3,000 personal and 2,000 horse, and increased it to 5,000 personal and 2,500 horse. On the same day I bestowed the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n on Qiy&amacr;m, son of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Mu&hdotb;ammad Qandah&amacr;r&imacr;, who was an Am&imacr;r-z&amacr;da, and was in service as a huntsman. On the 5th of the month of &Amacr;&zbarb;ar a jewelled dagger was given to D&amacr;r&amacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and by the hand of R&amacr;ja S&amacr;rang Deo dresses of honour were bestowed on the Amirs of the Deccan. As some (evil) things had been heard about &Sdotb;afdar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Kashmir, I dismissed him from the government, and favouring A&hdotb;mad Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n on account of his previous services, I promoted him to be Subadar of Kashmir, and confirmed his mansab of 2,500 personal and 1,500 horse, honoured him with a jewelled waist-dagger and a dress of honour, and gave him leave. By the hand of Ihtim&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n I sent winter dresses of honour to Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Bengal, and the Amirs that were attached to that province. On the 15th of the month there was laid before me the offering of Maka&hamza;&imacr;, son of Ifti&khbarb;&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, consisting of an elephant, <hi>go&tdotb;</hi><note n=1><hi>G&umacr;n&tdotb;h</hi>, a breed of small horses or ponies.</note> horses, and pieces of cloth. He was honoured with the title of Muruwwat &Khbarb;&amacr;n. At the request of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daula, I had sent for Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was in the fort of Gwalior, and he had the good fortune to pay his respects; his property, which had been confiscated, was restored to him.

<p>At this time &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja H&amacr;&shbarb;im, of Dahb&imacr;d, who at this day vigorously maintains in Transoxiana the profession <pb id=pb304 n=304>of a dervish, and in whom the people of that country have great belief, sent a letter by the hand of one of his disciples pointing out his old devotion (to the royal family) and connection and friendship of his ancestors with this illustrious family, together with a <hi>farj&imacr;</hi><note n=1>A <hi>farj&imacr;</hi> is a coat (see Blochmann, p. 89).</note> and a bow and a couplet which the late king B&amacr;bar had made for a saint of the name of &Khbarb;w&amacr;jag&imacr;, who also belonged to that sect of dervishes. The last hemistich is as follows:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;We are bound to the &Khbarb;w&amacr;jag&imacr; and are servants to the &Khbarb;w&amacr;jag&imacr;.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>I also with my own pen wrote some lines in the style of that writing, and sent impromptu quatrains with 1,000 Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; muhrs to the said &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;O thou whose kindness to me is ever more and more,
    <l>The State has remembrance of thee, O Dervish,
    <l>As from good tidings our heart is rejoiced,
    <l>We are glad that thy kindness passes all bounds.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>As I ordered that whoever had the poetic temperament should recite (compose?) this quatrain,<note n=2>Text <hi>&imacr;n rub&amacr;&ayin;&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;this quatrain,&rsquo; which does not seem to make sense. Perhaps <hi>&imacr;n</hi> here should be <hi>&amacr;y&imacr;n-i-rub&amacr;&ayin;&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;the rules or the custom of a quatrain.&rsquo; Similarly, <hi>&imacr;n kit&amacr;bat</hi> five lines down may be <hi>&amacr;y&imacr;n-i-kit&amacr;bat</hi>, &lsquo;the rules of writing.&rsquo;</note> &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Mas&imacr;&hdotb;u-z-zam&amacr;n said, and said very well&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Although we have the business of kingship before us,
    <l>Every moment more and more we think on the dervishes.
    <l>If the heart of our Dervish be gladdened by us
    <l>We count that to be the profit of our kingship.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>I gave the &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m 1,000 muhrs for the composition of this quatrain. On the 7th of the month of Day, when I was coming back from Pushkar and returning to Ajmir, on the way forty-two wild pigs were taken.

<p>On the 20th, M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n came and waited on me. A summary of his circumstances and of his family is <pb id=pb305 n=305>now written. On the side of his father<note n=1>His father was &Khbarb;al&imacr;lu-llah, previously mentioned in the T&umacr;zuk, and who had lately died (Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p, 84, and T&umacr;zuk, pp. 62 and 69). &Tumlb;ahm&amacr;sp gave Ni&ayin;matu-llah&apos;s daughter in marriage to his own son Isma&ayin;&imacr;l.</note> he is the grandson of M&imacr;r &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n, son of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Ni&ayin;matu-llah Wal&imacr;. During the reigns of the &Sdotb;afaw&imacr; kings the family had attained to great respect, so that &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Tumlb;ahm&amacr;sp gave his own sister J&amacr;nish<note n=2>&Khbarb;&amacr;ni&shbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;nim in Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, iii, 339.</note> &Khbarb;&amacr;nim to &Shbarb;&amacr;h Ni&ayin;matu-llah, and so on account of his being a great Shaikh and of his being an instructor he was made a relative and a son-in-law (of kings). On the side of his mother he was the daughter&apos;s son of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Isma&ayin;&imacr;l &Khbarb;&umacr;n&imacr; (Isma&ayin;&imacr;l II, the Bloody). After the death of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Ni&ayin;matu-llah, his son &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n received great consideration, and the late &Shbarb;&amacr;h (&Tumlb;ahm&amacr;sp) gave to his eldest son in marriage a daughter from the royal family. He gave the daughter of the above-mentioned &Shbarb;&amacr;h Isma&ayin;&imacr;l to another son of his, &Khbarb;al&imacr;lu-llah, to whom M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n was born. The aforesaid M&imacr;r &Khbarb;al&imacr;lu-llah, seven or eight years before this, had come from Persia and waited on me at Lahore. As he belonged to a high and saintly family, I was much interested in his affairs, and gave him a mansab and a jagir, and honoured and cherished him. After the seat of government was at Agra, in a short time he was attacked by bilious<note n=3><hi>Ish&amacr;l-i-kabd.</hi></note> diarrh&oelig;a from eating too many mangoes, and in ten or twelve days gave up his soul to the Creator. I was grieved at his going, and ordered what he had left in cash and jewels to be sent to his children in Persia. Meanwhile M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n, who was 22 years old, became a qalandar and dervish, and came to me at Ajmir in a way that nobody on the road could recognize him. I soothed all the troubles of his mind and the miseries of his inward and outward condition, <pb id=pb306 n=306>and gave him a mansab of 1,000 personal and 400 horse, and presented him with 30,000 darabs in cash. He is now in waiting and attendance on me.

<p>On the 12th, &Zumlb;afar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been removed from the Subah of Behar, came and waited on me, and made an offering of 100 muhrs, as well as three elephants. On the 15th of Day I increased the mansab of Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the Subahdar of Bengal, by 1,000 personal and horse, so as to make it 4,000 personal and horse. As the diwan and bakhshi of Bengal, &Hdotb;usain Beg and &Tumlb;&amacr;hir, had not done approved service, Mu&khbarb;li&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was one of the confidential servants of the Court, was nominated to these duties. I conferred on him a mansab of 2,000 personal and 700 horse, and also gave him a standard. The duty of <hi>&ayin;ar&zdotb;-mukarrir</hi> (reviser of petitions) I ordered to be given to Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the 25th, Friday, the weighing of my son &Khbarb;urram took place. Up to the present year, when he is 24 years old, and is married and has children, he has never defiled himself with drinking wine. On this day, when the assembly for his weighing was held, I said to him: &ldquo;B&amacr;b&amacr;, thou hast become the father of children, and kings and kings&apos; sons have drunk wine. To-day, which is the day of thy being weighed, I will give thee wine to drink, and give thee leave to drink it on feast days and at the time of the New Year, and at all great festivals. But thou must observe the path of moderation, for wise men do not consider it right to drink to such an extent as to destroy the understanding, and it is necessary that from drinking only profit should be derived.&rdquo; B&umacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; (Avicenna), who is one of the most learned of hakims and physicians, has written this quatrain&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Wine is a raging enemy, a prudent friend;
    <l>A little is an antidote, but much a snake&apos;s poison.
    <l>In much there is no little injury,
    <l>In a little there is much profit.&rdquo;
</lg>


<pb id=pb307 n=307><p>With much trouble wine was given to him. I had not drunk it till I was 15<note n=1>Two I.O. MSS. and the R.A.S. MS. have 18 instead of 15. Elliot has &ldquo;up to my fourteenth&rdquo; year. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was born in Rab&imacr;&ayin;, 977, or 31st August, 1569, and the beginning of wine-drinking to which he refers must have taken place at earliest in January, 1586. He tells us that it was after the death of Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m, and at the time when his father was at Attock. Now Akbar arrived there on 15th Mu&hdotb;arram, 994, according to Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n, and on 12th Day, 994, according to Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l, iii, 976, i.e. about the end of December, 1585, and at that time Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was 17 years and 4 months of age, or in his 18th year. He continued to drink heavily for nine years, i.e. till he was 26 (17 + 9), then he moderated for seven years, i.e. till he was 33, and he kept to that for fifteen years more, i.e. till he was 48. These years were lunar years, and he tells that at the time of writing he was 47 years and 9 months old, according to the lunar calendar. It seems to follow that the MSS. are right, and that we should read 18.</note> years old, except when in the time of my infancy two or three times my mother and wet-nurses gave it by way of infantile remedy. They asked for a little spirit from my revered father, and gave it me to the extent of a tola mixed with water and rosewater to take away a cough, designating it as medicine. At the time when the camp of my revered father had been pitched in order to put down the disturbance of Y&umacr;sufza&hamza;e Afghans at the fort of Attock, which is on the bank of the N&imacr;l&amacr;b (Indus) River, one day I had mounted to go out to hunt. When I had moved about a good deal and the signs of weariness had set in, a gunner of the name of Ust&amacr;d &Shbarb;&amacr;h-qul&imacr;, a wonderful gunner out of those under my revered uncle M&imacr;rz&amacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m, said to me that if I would take a cup of wine it would drive away the feeling of being tired and heavy. It was in the time of my youth, and as I felt disposed towards it I ordered Mahm&umacr;d, the &Amacr;b-d&amacr;r (person in charge of drinking water, etc.), to go to the house of &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &ayin;Al&imacr; and bring me an intoxicating draught. He sent me<note n=2>Elliot, vi, 341.</note> the amount of one and a half cups of yellow wine of a sweet taste in a little bottle. I drank <pb id=pb308 n=308>it, and found its quality agreeable. After that I took to drinking wine, and increased it from day to day until wine made from grapes ceased to intoxicate me, and I took to drinking arrack (<hi>&ayin;araq</hi>, spirits), and by degrees during nine years my potions rose to twenty cups of doubly distilled spirits, fourteen during the daytime and the remainder at night. The weight of this was six Hindustani sirs or one and a half maunds of Iran. The extent of my eating in those days was a fowl<note n=1>The two good I.O. MSS. have, not <hi>mur&ghbarb;</hi> or <hi>mur&ghbarb;&imacr;</hi>, but <hi>tughdar&imacr;</hi> or <hi>t&umacr;&ghbarb;dar&imacr;</hi>, a &lsquo;bustard,&rsquo; unless indeed the word be <hi>ta&ghbarb;add&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;breakfast.&rsquo; But probably the word is <hi>tughdar&imacr;</hi>, a bustard, and the reference is to the particular memorable day when he first drank wine. His food that day, he says, was a bustard with bread and a radish (<hi>turb</hi>).</note> with bread and vegetables (lit. radish).<note n=2>Blochmann. <hi>Calcutta Review</hi>, 1869, has &lsquo;turnips.&rsquo;</note> In that state of matters no one had the power to forbid me, and matters went to such a length that in the crapulous state from the excessive trembling of my hand I could not drink from my own cup, but others had to give it me to drink, until I sent for &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Hum&amacr;m, brother of &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Ab&umacr;-l-fat&hdotb;, who was of the most intimate with my revered father, and informed him of my state. He, with excessive sincerity and unfeigned burning of heart, said to me without hesitation, &ldquo;Lord of the world, by the way in which you drink spirits, God forbid it, but in six months matters will come to such a pass that there will be no remedy for it.&rdquo; As his words were said out of pure good-will, and sweet life was dear to me, they made an impression on me, and from that day I began to lessen my allowance and set myself to take <hi>fil&umacr;n&imacr;y&amacr;</hi>.<note n=3><hi>Fil&umacr;n&imacr;y&amacr;.</hi> The word is not given in ordinary dictionaries, but it is explained in Dozy&apos;s Supplement. It is stated there that it is a sedative electuary, and that the word is derived from the Greek, being <GR>filwnia</GR>, which is the name of an antidote or drug invented by Philon of Tarsus. There is an account of Philon and a reference to his drug in Smith&apos;s Classical Dictionary. Philon lived in or before the first century after Christ, and is referred to by Galen and others. The word as given there is <GR>filwneion</GR>. We are not told what it was made of. In <pb>Price&apos;s Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, filuniya, misread there as Kelourica, is described by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r as brother&apos;s son to <hi>tiry&amacr;q</hi>, i.e. theriaca (see Price, p. 6). <hi>Tiry&amacr;k</hi> or <hi>&tumlb;iry&amacr;q</hi> is supposed to be a Greek word (see Lane), and means an antidote against poison, etc. It is so used in the verse from Avicenna quoted by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r to his son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n. See D&apos;Herbelot, s.v. <hi>Teriak</hi>. But it is also often used apparently as a synonym for opium. The mixing of wine with spirits was intended to dilute the potation, for hitherto Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r had been taking raw spirit. A <hi>mi&sumlb;q&amacr;l</hi> is said to be 63&frac12; grains troy, and so 18 misqals would be about 3 ounces, and the six cups would be about 1&frac12; lb. troy. In Elliot, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r is made to say that he does not drink on Thursdays and Fridays. But the <hi>&shbarb;ab-i-jum&ayin;a</hi>, as Blochmann has pointed out elsewhere, &Amacr;y&imacr;n translation, p. 171, n. 3, means Thursday night or Friday eve, and this is clearly the case here, for Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r speaks of the eve&apos;s being followed by a blessed day. It should be noted that there is no connection in Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s mind between abstaining from wine and abstaining from meat. He did not eat meat on Thursdays or Sundays because he did not approve of taking life on these days, but he drank on both of them.</note> In <pb id=pb309 n=309>proportion as I diminished my liquor, I increased the amount of filuniya.

<p>I also ordered that the arrack should be diluted with wine of the grape so that there should be two parts wine and one part arrack. Every day I diminished the quantity I took, and in the course of seven years I brought it down to six cups. The weight of each cupful was 18&frac14; misqals. It is now fifteen years that I have drunk at this rate, neither more nor less. And my drinking time is the night except on the day of Thursdays, as it is the day of the blessed accession. Also on the eve<note n=1>Cf. Blochmann&apos;s translation and <hi>Calcutta Review</hi> for 1869.</note> of Friday, which is the most blessed eve of the week, and is the prelude to a blessed day (I do not drink). I drink at the end of each day with these two<note n=2>I understand the two exceptions (<hi>d&umacr; ch&imacr;z</hi>) to be that on Thursdays he drank in the daytime, contrary to the general rule of only drinking at night, and that on Thursday evenings he did not drink.</note> exceptions, for it does not appear right that this eve (Thursday night) should be spent in neglect, and that there should be an omission (on Friday) of returning thanks to the True Benefactor. On the day of Thursday and on the day of Sunday I do not eat <pb id=pb310 n=310>meat. Not on Thursday, because it is the day of my auspicious accession, and not on Sunday, because it is the birthday of my revered father, and he greatly honoured and held dear the day. After some time I substituted opium for filuniya. Now that my age has arrived at 46 solar years and 4 months, I eat eight surkhs (a red berry used as a weight) of opium when five gharis of day have passed, and six surkhs after one watch of night.

<p>I gave a jewelled dagger to &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n by the hand of Maq&sdotb;&umacr;d &ayin;Al&imacr;. &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; M&umacr;s&amacr;, a relation of Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, was dignified with the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and promoted to the mansab of 800 personal and 400 horse, and was allowed to go to Bengal. The mansab of &Zumlb;afar &Khbarb;&amacr;n was increased to 500 personal and horse, and he was appointed to duty in Bangash. On the same day Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain, brother of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n, was given the faujd&amacr;rship of the Sarkar of &Hdotb;i&sdotb;&sdotb;&amacr;r and dismissed, his mansab being increased by 200 horse to raise it to 500 personal and 400 horse, with the gift of an elephant. On the 5th Bahman an elephant was conferred on M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n. When the merchant &ayin;Abdu-l-Kar&imacr;m left Iran for Hindustan, my exalted brother &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s sent me by his hand a rosary of cornelian from Yemen and a cup of Venetian workmanship, which was very fine and rare. On the 9th of the same month they were laid before me. On the 18th some offerings of many kinds of jewelled ornaments, etc., which Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Parw&imacr;z had sent to me, were laid before me. On the 7th Isfand&amacr;rmu&zbarb;, &Sdotb;&amacr;diq, nephew of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah, who was permanently employed as Bakhshi, was honoured with the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n. I had also conferred this title on &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &ayin;Abdu-l-&ayin;Az&imacr;z. According to what was right, I called him by the title of &ayin;Abdu-l-&ayin;Az&imacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n and &Sdotb;&amacr;diq by that of &Sdotb;&amacr;diq &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the 10th, Jagat Singh, son of Kunwar Karan, who had obtained leave <pb id=pb311 n=311>to go to his native country, when he took leave was presented with 20,000 rupees, a horse, an elephant, a dress of honour, and a special shawl. Five thousand rupees, a horse, and a dress of honour were also given to Harid&amacr;s Jh&amacr;l&amacr;, who was one of the confidants of the R&amacr;n&amacr; and tutor to Karan&apos;s son. By his hand I also sent a mace of gold (<hi>&shbarb;a&shbarb;par&imacr;</hi>) for the R&amacr;n&amacr;.

<p>On the 20th of the same month, R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Singh, son of R&amacr;ja B&amacr;so, who on account of the nearness of his dwelling-place to it had been sent with Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n to capture the fort of K&amacr;ngra, came on my summons and waited on me. The aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n had entertained certain suspicions with regard to him, and on this account, considering him an undesirable companion, had repeatedly sent petitions to the Court, and wrote things about him until an order was received to summon him.

<p>On the 26th, Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n came from Multan and waited on me. In the end of this year news of victory and prosperity came in from all sides of my dominions. In the first place, this was with regard to the disturbance of A&hdotb;d&amacr;d, the Afghan, who for a long time past had been in rebellion in the hill country of Kabul, and round whom many of the Afghans of that neighbourhood had assembled, and against whom from the time of my revered father until now, which is the 10th year after my accession, armies have always been employed. He by degrees was defeated, and, falling into a wretched state, a part of his band was dispersed and a part killed. He took refuge for some time in Char&khbarb;, which was a place on which he relied, but &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n surrounded it and closed the road for entry and exit. When there remained no grass for his beasts or means of living for men in the fortress, he at night brought down his animals from the hills and grazed them on the skirts, and accompanied them himself, in order that he might set an example to his men. At last this <pb id=pb312 n=312>intelligence reached &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n. He then appointed a body of his leaders and experienced men to go into ambush on an appointed night in the neighbourhood of Char&khbarb;. That band went and hid itself at night in places of refuge, and &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n rode on the same day in that direction. When those ill-fated ones brought out their cattle and let them loose to graze, and the ill-conditioned A&hdotb;d&amacr;d himself passed by the places of ambush with his own band, suddenly a dust rose in front of him. When they enquired it became known that it was &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n. In a state of bewilderment he endeavoured to turn back, and the scouts announced to the aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n that it was A&hdotb;d&amacr;d. The &Khbarb;&amacr;n gave his horse the reins and went at A&hdotb;d&amacr;d; the men who were in ambush also blocked the road and attacked him. The fight lasted till midday in consequence of the broken nature of the ground and the thickness of the jungle; at last defeat fell on the Afghans and they betook themselves to the hill: about 300 fighting men went to hell and 100 were taken prisoners. A&hdotb;d&amacr;d could not regain the stronghold and hold on there. Necessarily he turned his face towards Qandahar. The victorious troops entering Char&khbarb;, burnt all the places and houses of those ill-fortuned ones, and destroyed and rooted them up from their foundations.

<p>Another<note n=1>Elliot, vi, 343.</note> piece of news was the defeat of the ill-starred &ayin;Ambar and the destruction of his unfortunate army. Briefly, a band of the influential leaders and a body of Barg&imacr;s (Mahrattas), who are a hardy lot and who are the centre of resistance in that country, becoming angry with &ayin;Ambar, showed an intention to be loyal, and begging for quarter from &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was in B&amacr;l&amacr;p&umacr;r with an army of royal troops, agreed to interview the said &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and being satisfied, &Amacr;dam &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Y&amacr;q&umacr;t &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <pb id=pb313 n=313>and other leaders, and the Barg&imacr;s J&amacr;do<note n=1>The MSS. have J&amacr;d&umacr;n R&amacr;y and B&amacr;b&amacr; Chokanth (J&imacr;&umacr; Kanth?). The Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, ii, 646, has M&amacr;l&umacr;j&imacr; K&amacr;ntiya. The text has B&amacr;b&umacr; K&amacr;ntiya.</note> R&amacr;y and B&amacr;p&umacr; K&amacr;&tdotb;iy&amacr;, came and interviewed him. &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n gave each of them a horse, an elephant, money, and dress of honour, according to their quality and condition, made them hot in duty and loyalty, and marching from Balapur started against the rebel &ayin;Ambar in their company. On the road they fell in with an army of the Dakhanis, whose leaders were Ma&hdotb;alld&amacr;r,<note n=2>The text is corrupt. The Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, id., has &Amacr;ta&shbarb; instead of D&amacr;ni&shbarb;.</note> D&amacr;ni&shbarb; (&Amacr;ta&shbarb;?), Dil&amacr;war, Bijl&imacr;, F&imacr;r&umacr;z, and others, and routed it.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;With broken arms and loosened loins,
    <l>No strength in their feet, no sense in their heads.&rdquo;<note n=3>The text is corrupt. In the second line of the verse the text has <hi>guft</hi>, which seems meaningless, and two I.O. MSS. and B.M. MS. Add. 26,215 have <hi>jang</hi>, &lsquo;battle.&rsquo; The R.A.S. MS<corr>.</corr> has <hi>p&amacr;y</hi>, &lsquo;feet,&rsquo; which seems to me the best reading. Possibly <hi>guft</hi> should be read <hi>kift</hi>, &lsquo;shoulder.&rsquo;</note>
</lg>


<p>They reached the camp of that ill-starred one, and he from excessive pride determined to fight with the victorious troops. Having collected those rebels who were with him and &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s army and that of Qu&tumlb;bu-l-mulk together, and preparing their artillery, he started to meet the royal troops until a space of not more than 5 or 6 kos remained between. On Sunday, the 25th Bahman, the armies of light and darkness approached each other and the scouts became visible. Three watches of day had passed when cannon and rocket firing began. In the end D&amacr;r&amacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was in command of the vanguard, with other leaders and zealous men such as R&amacr;ja B&imacr;r Singh Deo, R&amacr;y Chand, &ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n the Tatar, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; Beg Turkm&amacr;n, and other lions of the forest of bravery, drew their swords and charged the vanguard of the enemy. Performing the dues of manliness and bravery, they scattered this army like the Ban&amacr;tu-n-na&ayin;&shbarb; (&lsquo;Daughters of the Bier,&rsquo; i.e. the Great Bear); and not stopping there they attacked <pb id=pb314 n=314>the enemy&apos;s centre. Turning on the army opposed to them, such a hand-to-hand struggle took place that the onlookers remained bewildered. For nearly two gharis this combat went on. Heaps of the dead lay there, and the ill-starred &ayin;Ambar, unable to offer further opposition, turned his face to flight. If darkness<note n=1>It will be remembered that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r has called &ayin;Ambar&apos;s army the army of darkness, alluding perhaps to &ayin;Ambar&apos;s being an Abyssinian.</note> and gloom had not come on at the cry of those black-fortuned ones, not one of them would have found the road to the valley of safety. The crocodiles of the river of conflict followed the fugitives for 2 or 3 kos. When horses and men could move no more and the defeated were scattered, they drew rein and returned to their places. The whole of the enemy&apos;s artillery, with 300 laden camels that carried rockets, war elephants, Arab and Persian horses, weapons and armour beyond reckoning, fell into the hands of the servants of the State, and there was no counting the slain and the fallen. A great many of the leaders fell alive into their hands. The next day the victorious troops, marching from the place of victory, proceeded to Kark&imacr;, which was the nest of those owlish ones, and seeing no trace of them they encamped there, and obtained news that they during that night and day had fallen miserably in different places. For some days the victorious army, delayed at Kark&imacr;, levelled with the dark earth the buildings and houses of the enemy, and burnt that populous place. In consequence of the occurrence of certain events, to describe which in detail would take too long here, they returned from that place and descended by the Rohan Khan&ddotb;a Pass. In reward for this service I ordered increases to be made in the mansabs of a number who had shown zeal and bravery.

<p>The third piece of news was the conquest of the province of Khokhar&amacr;<note n=1>Elliot, vi, and Blochmann, p. 479, n. 3.</note> and the acquisition of the diamond <pb id=pb315 n=315>mines, which were taken by the excellent exertions of Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n. This province is one of the dependencies of the Subah of Behar and Patna. There is a river there from which they procure diamonds. At the season when there is little water, there are pools and water-holes, and it has become known by experience to those who are employed in this work that above every water-hole in which there are diamonds, there are crowds of flying animals of the nature of gnats, and which in the language of India they call <hi>jh&imacr;ng&amacr;</hi>(?).<note n=2>Perhaps it should be <hi>phang&amacr;</hi> or <hi>feringha</hi>, a grasshopper, or it may be <hi>jh&imacr;ngur</hi>, a cockroach. Presumably the country was covered with thick jungle, and the cloud of insects indicated where water was. Erskine&apos;s MS. has <hi>chika</hi>. B.M. Or. 3276 has <hi>chika</hi> or <hi>jika</hi>. Possibly the word is <hi>jh&imacr;ngur</hi>, a cockroach (see Blochmann in J.A.S.B. for 1871, vol. xl). He quotes a Hindustani Dict., which says that the <hi>jh&imacr;ng&amacr;</hi> is what in Arabic is called the <hi>jar&amacr;du-l-ba&hdotb;r</hi> or water-locust. The river referred to by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r is the Sankh of I.G., xii, 222. V. Ball, Proc. A.S.B. for 1881, p. 42, suggests that the <hi>jh&imacr;ng&amacr;</hi> may be thunder-stones!</note> Keeping the bed of the stream in sight as far as it is accessible, they make a collection of stones (<hi>sangch&imacr;n</hi>) round the water-holes. After this they empty the water-holes with spades and shovels to the extent of a yard or 1&frac12; yards and dig up the area. They find among the stones and sand large and small diamonds<note n=3>Compare Tavernier&apos;s account of the searching for diamonds in Sambhalpur (vol. ii, p. 311, of ed. of 1676).</note> and bring them out. It occasionally happens that they find a piece of diamond worth 100,000 rupees. Briefly, this province and this river were in possession of a Hindu Zamindar of the name of Durjan S&amacr;l, and although the governors of the Subah frequently sent armies against him and went there themselves, in consequence of the difficult roads and thickness of the jungles they contented themselves with taking two or three diamonds and left him in his former condition. When the aforesaid Subah was transferred from &Zumlb;afar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n was <pb id=pb316 n=316>appointed in his place, at the time of his taking leave I ordered him to go and take the province out of the possession of that unknown and insignificant individual. As soon as he arrived in the province of Behar he assembled a force and went against that Zamindar. According to former custom he sent some of his men with a promise to give some diamonds and some elephants, but the &Khbarb;&amacr;n did not agree to this and entered impetuously into the province. Before the fellow could collect his men he found guides and invaded it. Just when the zamindar received this news, the hills and vales that are his abode were beleaguered. Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m sent men about to find him and they got hold of him in a cave with several women, one of whom was his mother, while others were also his father&apos;s wives. They arrested him, and also one of his brothers. They searched and took from them the diamonds they had with them. Twenty-three male and female elephants also fell into Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m&apos;s hands. In reward for this service the mansab of Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n original and increase, was made up to 4,000 personal and horse, and he was exalted with the title of Fat&hdotb;-jang. Orders were also given for an increase in the mansabs of those who accompanied him on this service and had shown bravery. That province is now in possession of the imperial servants of the State. They carry on work in the bed of the stream, and bring to Court whatever diamonds are found. A large diamond, the value of which has been estimated at 50,000 rupees, has lately been brought from there. If a little pains are taken, it is probable that good diamonds will be found and be placed in the jewel-room.





<pb id=pb317 n=317>
<div1 id=yr11>
<head>The Eleventh New Year&apos;s Feast after the auspicious Accession.</head>


<p>Fifteen gharis of day had passed on Sunday, the last day of Isfand&amacr;rmu&zbarb;, corresponding with the 1st Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal (19th March, 1616), when from the mansion of Pisces the sun cast the ray of prosperity on the palace of Aries. At this auspicious hour, having performed the dues of service and supplication at the throne of Almighty God, I ascended the throne of State in the public audience hall, the area of which was laid out with tents and canopies (<hi>&shbarb;&amacr;miy&amacr;nah&amacr;</hi>), and its sides adorned with European screens, painted gold brocades, and rare cloths. The princes, Amirs, the chief courtiers, the ministers of State, and all the servants of the Court performed their congratulatory salutations. As &Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb; N&amacr;d &ayin;Al&imacr;, <hi>g&umacr;yanda</hi> (singer), was one of the ancient servants, I ordered that whatever offerings were made on the Monday by anyone in the shape of cash or goods should be given to him by way of reward. On the 2nd day (of Farward&imacr;n) the offerings of some of the employés were laid before me. On the 4th day the offering of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n, who had sent them from Agra, and which consisted of several diamonds and pearls, of jewelled things, cloth stuffs of all kinds, and an elephant, worth altogether 50,000 rupees, was brought before me. On the 5th day, Kunwar Karan, who had been given leave to go to his home, returned and waited on me. He presented as offering 100 muhrs, 1,000 rupees, an elephant with fittings, and four horses. To the mansab of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which was 4,000 personal and 2,000 horse, I on the 7th made an addition of 1,000 personal and 2,000 horse, and honoured him with drums and a standard. On this day the offering of M&imacr;r Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain was laid before me; what he offered was approved and accepted. Among the things was a jewelled dagger which had <pb id=pb318 n=318>been made under his superintendence.<note n=1>Text, <hi>&khbarb;&umacr;d-hunark&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;his own workmanship,&rsquo; but the MSS. have <hi>&khbarb;&umacr;d-sark&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>. See also Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 87, which says that Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n had had it made in B&imacr;j&amacr;p&umacr;r.</note> On its hilt was a yellow ruby<note n=2>Really a topaz. Tavernier points out that the natives call various precious stones rubies, distinguishing them by their colour.</note> (<hi>y&amacr;q&umacr;t-i-zard</hi>), exceeding clear and bright, in size equal to half a hen&apos;s egg. I had never before seen so large and beautiful a yellow ruby. Along with it were other rubies of approved colour and old emeralds. Brokers (<hi>muq&imacr;m&amacr;n</hi>) valued it (the dagger) at 50,000 rupees. I increased the mansab of the said M&imacr;r by 1,000 horse, which brought it to 5,000 personal and 3,500 horse. On the 8th I increased the mansab of S&amacr;diq &Hdotb;&amacr;&zbarb;iq by 300 personal and horse, and that of Ir&amacr;dat &Khbarb;&amacr;n by 300 personal and 200 horse, so as to raise each to 1,000 personal and 500 horse. On the 9th the offering of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan was laid before me; of jewelled ornaments and cloth stuffs, what was of the value of 40,000 rupees was accepted, and the remainder I made a present to him. The offering of T&amacr;t&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n Bak&amacr;wul-beg&imacr;, consisting of one ruby (<hi>la&ayin;l</hi>), one <hi>y&amacr;q&umacr;t</hi>, a jewelled <hi>ta&khbarb;t&imacr;</hi> (signet?), two rings, and some cloths, was accepted. On the 10th three elephants which R&amacr;ja Mah&amacr; Singh sent from the Deccan, and 100 and odd pieces of gold brocade, etc., which Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n sent from Lahore, were laid before me. On this date Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n presented his offering of two pearl rosaries, two rubies, six large pearls, and one gold tray, to the value of 28,000 rupees. At the end of Thursday, the 11th, I went to the house of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah in order to add to his dignity. He then presented me with his offering, and I examined it in detail. Much of it was exceedingly rare. Of jewels there were two pearls worth 30,000 rupees, one <hi>qu&tumlb;b&imacr;</hi> ruby which had been purchased for 22,000 rupees, with other pearls and rubies. <pb id=pb319 n=319>Altogether the value was 110,000 rupees. These had the honour of acceptance, and of cloth, etc., the value of 15,000 rupees was taken. When I had finished inspecting the offering I passed nearly one watch of the night in conviviality and enjoyment. I ordered that cups (of wine) should be given to the Amirs and servants. The ladies of the <hi>ma&hdotb;all</hi> (harem) were also with me, and a pleasant assembly was held. After the festive assembly was over I begged I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah to excuse me, and went to the hall of audience. On the same day I ordered N&umacr;r-ma&hdotb;all Begam to be called N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n Begam. On the 12th the offering of I&ayin;tib&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n was laid before me. They had made a vessel (<hi>&zumlb;arf</hi>) in the form of a fish, jewelled with beautiful gems, exceedingly well shaped and calculated to hold my allowance.<note n=1>Text, <hi>ba-and&amacr;za-i-mu&ayin;t&amacr;d-i-man</hi>, &lsquo;of capacity corresponding to my custom.&rsquo; Presumably it was a drinking-cup, and held Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s customary potation.</note> This, with other jewels and jewelled things and cloth stuffs, the value of which was worth 56,000 rupees, I accepted and gave back the rest. Bah&amacr;dur &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Qandahar, had sent seven Iraq horses and nine <hi>tuq&umacr;z</hi> (81?) of cloth stuffs. The offerings of Ir&amacr;dat &Khbarb;&amacr;n and R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Mal, son of R&amacr;ja B&amacr;so, were laid before me on the 13th. &ayin;Abdu-s-Sub&hdotb;&amacr;n, who held a mansab of 1,200 personal and 600 horse, was promoted to 1,500 personal and 700 horse. On the 15th the Subahdarship of the province of Thatha was transferred from &Shbarb;am&shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n &Umacr;zbeg to Mu&zumlb;affar &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the 16th the offering of I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah, was laid before me. Of this the equivalent of 32,000 rupees was taken, and I gave back the rest to him. On the 17th the offering of Tarbiyat &Khbarb;&amacr;n was inspected. Of jewels and cloth what was valued at 17,000 rupees was approved. On the 18th I went to the house of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and his offering was presented to me there. From the palace <pb id=pb320 n=320>to his house was a distance of about a kos. For half the distance he had laid down under foot velvet woven with gold and gold brocade and plain velvet, such that its value was represented to me as 10,000 rupees. I passed that day until midnight at his house with the ladies. The offerings he had prepared were laid before me in detail. Jewels, jewelled ornaments, and things of gold and beautiful cloth stuffs, things of the value of 114,000 rupees, four horses, and one camel were approved of. On the 19th (Farward&imacr;n), which was the day of honour (<hi>r&umacr;z-i-&shbarb;araf</hi>) of the sun, a grand assembly was held in the palace. In order to observe the auspicious hour, when 2&frac12; gharis of day were left of the aforesaid day, I seated myself on the throne. My son B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram at this blessed hour laid before me a ruby of the purest water and brilliancy, which they pronounced to be of the value of 80,000 rupees. I fixed his mansab, which was 15,000 personal and 8,000 horse, at 20,000 personal and 10,000 horse. On the same day my lunar weighing took place. I increased the mansab of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah, which was 6,000 personal and 3,000 horse, to 7,000 personal and 5,000 horse, and bestowed on him a <hi>t&umacr;m&amacr;n t&umacr;&ghbarb;</hi> (horse-tail standard), and ordered his drums to be beaten after those of my son &Khbarb;urram. I increased the mansab of Tarbiyat &Khbarb;&amacr;n by 500 personal and horse, so as to bring it to 3,500 personal and 1,500 horse. The mansab of I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n was increased by 1,000 personal and 400 horse. Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n was promoted to 700 personal and 300 horse, and appointed to the Subah of Behar. Sal&amacr;mu-llah, the Arab, was honoured with the title of &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and, being dignified with a necklace of pearls, became one of the royal<note n=1><hi>&Hdotb;alqa ba-g&umacr;sh&amacr;n.</hi> Apparently referring to his being one of those who bored their ears in imitation of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r.</note> servants. I promoted M&imacr;r Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n Inj&umacr; to the title of &ayin;A&zdotb;udu-d-daulah (Arm of the State). On the <pb id=pb321 n=321>21st Almighty God gave &Khbarb;usrau a son by the daughter of Muq&imacr;m, son of Mihtar F&amacr;&zdotb;il Rik&amacr;b-d&amacr;r (stirrup-holder). To Allah-d&amacr;d, the Afghan, who, accepting my service, had separated himself from the evil-minded A&hdotb;d&amacr;d and come to Court, I gave 20,000 darabs (10,000 rupees). On the 25th came the news of the death of R&amacr;y Manohar, who had been attached to the army of the Deccan. Giving his son a mansab of 500 personal and 300 horse, I bestowed upon him his father&apos;s place and property. On the 26th the offering of N&amacr;d &ayin;Al&imacr; Maid&amacr;n&imacr;, consisting of nine horses, several bits (? <hi>dah&amacr;na k&imacr;&shbarb;</hi><note n=1>The text is corrupt. The true reading seems to be <hi>&sdotb;ad d&amacr;na-i-k&imacr;&shbarb;</hi>, &lsquo;one hundred pieces of muslin&rsquo; (?). I.O. 181 seems to have <hi>kab&shbarb;</hi>, &lsquo;rams&rsquo;.</note>), and four Persian camels (<hi>wil&amacr;yat&imacr;</hi>), was brought before me. On the 28th I presented Bah&amacr;dur &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Qandahar, M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n, son of &Khbarb;al&imacr;lu-llah, and Sayyid B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d, governor of Bhakar, each with an elephant. On the 1st Urd&imacr;bihi&shbarb;t, at the request of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, I presented drums to his brother Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the 3rd I gave Allah-d&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the Afghan, a jewelled <hi>khapwa</hi> (dagger). On the same day news came that Qadam,<note n=2>Here follow two unintelligible words, <hi>Pag&amacr;na Bank&amacr;na</hi>.</note> one of the Afr&imacr;d&imacr; Afghans who had been loyal and obedient, and to whom the <hi>r&amacr;h-d&amacr;r&imacr;</hi> (transit dues) of the Khaibar Pass belonged, from some slight suspicion had withdrawn his feet from the circle of obedience and raised his head in sedition. He had sent a force against each of the posts (<hi>th&amacr;na</hi>), and wherever he and his men went, through the carelessness of those men (in the posts), had plundered and killed many of the people. Briefly, in consequence of the shameful action of this senseless Afghan, a new disturbance broke out in the hill country of Kabul. When this news arrived I ordered H&amacr;r&umacr;n, brother of Qadam, and Jal&amacr;l, his son, who were at Court, to be apprehended and handed over to &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n to be imprisoned in the fort of Gwalior. By the <pb id=pb322 n=322>manifestation of the Divine mercy and kindness and the signs of God&apos;s favour, an affair took place at this time which is not devoid of strangeness. After the victory over the R&amacr;n&amacr; my son presented me in Ajmir with an exceedingly beautiful and clear ruby, valued at 60,000 rupees. It occurred to me that I ought to bind this ruby on my own arm. I much wanted two rare pearls of good water of one form to be a fit match for this kind of ruby. Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n had procured one grand pearl of the value of 20,000 rupees, and given it to me as a New Year&apos;s offering. It occurred to me that if I could procure a pair to it they would make a perfect bracelet. &Khbarb;urram, who from his childhood had had the honour of waiting on my revered father, and remained in attendance on him day and night, represented to me that he had seen a pearl in an old turban (<hi>sar-band</hi>) of a weight and shape equal to this pearl. They produced an old <hi>sar-p&imacr;ch</hi> (worn on the turban), containing a royal pearl of the same quality, weight, and shape, not differing in weight even by a trifle, so much so that the jewellers were astonished at the matter. It agreed in value, shape, lustre, and brilliance; one might say they had been shed from the same mould. Placing the two pearls alongside of the ruby, I bound them on my arm, and placing my head on the ground of supplication and humility, I returned thanks to the Lord that cherished His slave, and made my tongue utter His praise&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Who succeeds with hand and tongue?
    <l>He who performs the dues of thanks.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>On the 5th (Urd&imacr;bihi&shbarb;t) 30 Iraq and Turki horses that Murtaz&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n had sent from Lahore were brought before me, as also 63 horses, 15 camels, male and female, a bundle of crane&apos;s (<hi>kulang</hi>) plumes, 9 <hi>&ayin;&amacr;qir&imacr;</hi>(?),<note n=1>Perhaps this should be <hi>fa&ghbarb;f&umacr;r&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;porcelain.&rsquo;</note> <pb id=pb323 n=323>9 veined<note n=1><hi>Jauhar-d&amacr;r</hi>, defined by Vullers as bone or wood bearing veins, i.e. striated.</note> fish-teeth, 9 pieces of china from Tartary, 3 guns, etc., from &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n, which he had sent from Kabul, were accepted. Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n presented an offering of a small elephant from Abyssinia which they had brought by sea in a ship. In comparison with the elephants of Hindustan it presents some peculiarities. Its ears are larger than the ears of the elephants of this place, and its trunk and tail are longer. In the time of my revered father I&ayin;tim&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n of Cujarat sent a young elephant<note n=2>See Akbar-n&amacr;ma, ii, 315. It was sent before Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was born. It, too, was an African elephant.</note> as an offering; by degrees it grew up and was very fiery and bad-tempered. On the 7th a jewelled dagger was given to Mu&zumlb;affar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Thatha. On the same day news came that a band of Afghans<note n=3>Here the two words referred to at note 2 on p. 321 are repeated.</note> had attacked &ayin;Abdu-s-Sub&hdotb;&amacr;n, brother of &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam, who was stationed at one of the posts, and had laid siege to his post. &ayin;Abdu-s-Sub&hdotb;&amacr;n, with certain other mansabdars and servants who had been appointed to go with him had behaved valiantly. But at last, in accordance with the saying&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;When gnats get wings they smite the elephant,&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>those dogs overcame them, and elevated &ayin;Abdu-s-Sub&hdotb;&amacr;n with several of the men of the post to the dignity of martyrdom.<note n=4>Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;. i, 736. &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam&apos;s name was M&imacr;rz&amacr; Bar&khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;r.</note> As a condolence for this affair a gracious farman and a special dress of honour were sent to &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam, who had been appointed ambassador to Iran (and was still in that country). On the 14th the offering of Mukarram &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Mu&ayin;azzam &Khbarb;&amacr;n, came from Bengal. It consisted of jewels and articles procurable in that province, and was brought before me. I increased the mansab of some of the jagirdars of Gujarat. Of these, <pb id=pb324 n=324>Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, whose mansab was that of 1,000 personal and 500 horse, was raised to 1,500 personal and 300<note n=1>This seems wrong; the number of horse would probably not be reduced.</note> horse, and had a standard given to him as well. Sayyid Q&amacr;sim, son of Sayyid Dil&amacr;war B&amacr;rha, was raised to an original and increased mansab of 800 personal and 450 horse, and Y&amacr;r Beg, nephew of A&hdotb;mad Q&amacr;sim Koka, to one of 600 personal with 250 horse. On the 17th there came the news of the death of Razz&amacr;q of Merv, the &Umacr;zbeg who belonged to the army of the Deccan. He was well skilled in war, and one of the distinguished Amirs of M&amacr;war&amacr;&hamza;a-n-nahr. On the 21st, Allah-d&amacr;d, the Afghan, was honoured with the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and his mansab, which was 1,000 personal and 600 horse, was raised to 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse. Three hundred thousand rupees out of the treasury of Lahore were ordered as a reward and for expenses to &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n, who had greatly exerted himself in the Afghan disturbance. On the 28th, Kunwar Karan obtained leave to go home for his marriage. I conferred on him a dress of honour, a special Iraq horse with a saddle, an elephant, and a jewelled waist-dagger. On the 3rd of this month (&Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;d) the news of the death of Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n came. He was one of the ancients of this State. My revered father had brought him up and raised him to a position of consequence and trust. In my reign also he obtained the grace of noteworthy service, namely the overthrow of &Khbarb;usrau. His mansab had been raised to 6,000 personal and 5,000 horse. As he was at this time Subahdar of the Panjab, he had undertaken the capture of K&amacr;ngra, to which in strength no other fort in the hill country of that province or even in the whole inhabited world can be compared. He had obtained leave to go on this duty. I was much grieved in mind at this news; in truth, grief at the death of such <pb id=pb325 n=325>a loyal follower is only reasonable. As he had died after spending his days in loyalty, I prayed to God for pardon for him. On the 4th &Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;d the mansab of Sayyid Ni&zumlb;&amacr;m was fixed, original and increase, at 900 personal and 650 horse. I gave N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Qul&imacr; the post of entertainer to the ambassadors from all parts. On the 7th news came of the death of Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n B&amacr;rha; he was a brave and ambitious young man. He had exerted himself in an exemplary way in the battle with &Khbarb;usrau. He bade farewell to this perishable world in the Deccan through cholera (<hi>hai&zdotb;a</hi>). I conferred favours on his sons. &ayin;Al&imacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad, who was the eldest and most upright of his children, was given the mansab of 300<note n=1>So in text, but No. 181 has 600, and this is more likely, for the number of horse is never, I think, larger than the <hi>z&amacr;t</hi> rank.</note> personal and 400 horse, and his (&ayin;Al&imacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad&apos;s) brother, by name Bah&amacr;dur, that of 400 personal and 200 horse. Sayyid &ayin;Al&imacr;, who was his nephew, received an increase in rank of 500 personal and horse. On the same day &Khbarb;&umacr;b-Allah, son of &Shbarb;&amacr;h-b&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n Kamb&umacr;, received the title of Ran-b&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the 8th<note n=2>I.O. MSS. have 18th.</note> the mansab of H&amacr;shim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, original and increase, was fixed at 2,500 personal and 1,800 horse. On this date I bestowed 20,000 <hi>darabs</hi> (10,000 rupees) on Allah-d&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the Afghan. Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, Raja of the province of B&amacr;ndh&umacr;, whose ancestors were considerable zamindars in Hindustan, through the patronage of my fortunate son B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram, obtained the blessing of paying his respects to me, and his offences were pardoned. On the 9th,<note n=3>I.O. MSS. have 20th.</note> Kaly&amacr;n of Jesalm&imacr;r, to summon whom R&amacr;ja Kishan D&amacr;s had gone, came and waited on me. He presented 100 muhrs and 1,000 rupees. His elder brother R&amacr;wal Bh&imacr;m was a person of distinction. When he died he left a son 2 months old, and he too did not live <pb id=pb326 n=326>long. In the time when I was prince I had taken his daughter in marriage, and called her by the title of Malika-Jah&amacr;n<note n=1>The two I.O. MSS. have the following sentence here: &ldquo;On this day it happened that however much I tried to write, my heart and hand would not act. Whenever I seized the pen my condition altered. At last I had to tell I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah to write.&rdquo;</note> (queen of the world). As the ancestors of this tribe had come of ancient loyal people, this alliance took place. Having summoned the aforesaid Kaly&amacr;n, who was the brother of R&amacr;wal Bh&imacr;m, I exalted<note n=2>This sentence is not in the I.O. MSS.</note> him with the <hi>t&imacr;ka</hi> of R&amacr;ja and the title of R&amacr;wal. News came that after the death of Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n loyalty was shown by R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n, and that, after giving encouragement to the men of the fort of K&amacr;ngra an arrangement had been made that he should bring to Court the son of the Raja of that country, who was 29 years old. In consequence of his great zeal in this service, I fixed his mansab, which was 1,000 personal and 800 horse, at 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse. &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n was promoted from his original and increased mansab to that of 4,000 personal and 2,500 horse. On this date<note n=3>Here comes the passage which the two I.O. MSS. enter higher up.</note> an event occurred such that, although I was greatly desirous of writing it down, my hand and heart have failed me. Whenever I took my pen my state became bewildered, and I helplessly ordered I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah to write it.

<p>&ldquo;An ancient sincere slave, I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah, by order writes in this auspicious volume<note n=4>I.O. MS. 181 has &ldquo;writes that on the 11th,&rdquo; etc.</note> that on the 11th<note n=5>The I.O. MSS. add here &ldquo;of the 11th year.&rdquo;</note> &Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;d the traces of fever were seen in the pure daughter<note n=6>Probably this is the Chimn&imacr; Begam, a daughter of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, whose grave is near that of the saint &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n Chi&shbarb;t&imacr; (&ldquo;Rajputana Gazetteer,&rdquo; ii, 62). Probably Chimn&imacr; should be Chaman&imacr;, which means &lsquo;verdant&rsquo; and comes from <hi>chaman</hi>, a garden. Perhaps she died of smallpox. It was in the summer.</note> of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Khbarb;urram of lofty fortune, for whom His Majesty showed much affection as the early fruit of <pb id=pb327 n=327>the garden of auspiciousness. After three days pustules (<hi>&amacr;bila</hi>) appeared, and on the 26th of the same month, corresponding with Wednesday, the 29th Jum&amacr;d&amacr;-l-awwal (15th June, 1616), in the year 1025, the bird of her soul flew from her elemental cage and passed into the gardens of Paradise. From this date an order was given that Ch&amacr;r-&shbarb;amba (Wednesday) should be called Kam-&shbarb;amba (or <hi>Gum-&shbarb;amba</hi>). What shall I write as to what happened to the pure personality of the shadow of God in consequence of this heartburning event and grief-increasing calamity? Inasmuch as it happened after this manner to that soul of the world, what must be the condition of those other<note n=1>Apparently the reference is to the parents of the child and to the grandfather, that is, the writer of this notice.</note> servants whose life was bound up with that pure personality? For two days the servants were not received in audience, and an order was given that a wall should be built in front of the house which had been the abode of that bird of paradise, so that it might not be seen. In addition to this he did not adorn the gate of the hall of audience (did not come there). On the third day he went in an agitated state to the house of the illustrious prince, and the servants had the good fortune to pay their salutations and found fresh life. On the road, however much the &Hdotb;a&zdotb;rat (the Emperor) desired to control himself, the tears flowed from the auspicious eyes, and for a long time it was so that at the mere hearing of a word from which came a whiff of pain, the state of the &Hdotb;a&zdotb;rat became bewildered. He remained for some days in the house of the prince of the inhabitants of the world, and on Monday<note n=2>I.O. MSS. have Monday, the 6th T&imacr;r, and say that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r went to Cha&shbarb;ma-i-N&umacr;r on the 9th, which they say was a Thursday. And we see later that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r speaks of Saturday as the 11th.</note> of T&imacr;r, Divine month, he went to the house of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and turned back thence to the Cha&shbarb;ma-i-N&umacr;r, and for two or <pb id=pb328 n=328>three days employed himself there. But as long as he was in Ajmir he could not control himself. Whenever the word &lsquo;friendship&rsquo; reached his ear, the tears would drop from his eyes unrestrained, and the hearts of his faithful followers were torn in pieces. When the departure of the cortège of fortune to the Subah of the Deccan took place, he gained a little composure.&rdquo;

<p>On this date Prith&imacr; Chand, son of R&amacr;y Manohar, obtained the title of Ray and the mansab of 500 personal and 400 horse, and a jagir in his native place. On Saturday, the 11th, I went from the Cha&shbarb;ma-i-N&umacr;r to the palace at Ajmir. On the eve of Sunday, the 12th, after 37 seconds had passed, at the time of the ascension of Sagittarius to the 27th degree, by the calculations of the Hindu astronomers, and the 15th degree of Capricorn, by the calculations of the Greeks, there came from the womb of the daughter of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n (wife of &Khbarb;urram) a precious pearl into the world of being. With joy and gladness at this great boon the drums beat loudly, and the door of pleasure and enjoyment was opened in the face of the people. Without delay or reflection the name of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at came to my tongue. I hope that his coming will be auspicious and blessed to me and to his father. On the 12th a jewelled dagger<note n=1>The word &lsquo;dagger&rsquo; is omitted in the text.</note> and an elephant were bestowed on R&amacr;wal Kaly&amacr;n of Jesalm&imacr;r. On the same day arrived the news of the death of &Khbarb;aw&amacr;&sdotb;&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, whose jagir was in the Sarkar of Qanauj. I gave an elephant to R&amacr;y Kunwar, Diwan of Gujarat. On the 22nd of the same month (T&imacr;r) I added 500 personal and horse to the mansab of R&amacr;ja Mah&amacr; Singh, so as to make it one of 4,000 personal and 3,000 horse. The mansab of &ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Tat&amacr;r&imacr;, who before this had been exalted with the title of Nu&sdotb;rat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, was fixed at 2,000 personal and 500 horse, and <pb id=pb329 n=329>a standard was also conferred on him. With a view to the accomplishment of certain purposes, I had made a vow that they should place a gold railing with lattice-work at<note n=1>I.O. MSS. have <hi>bar daur</hi>, &lsquo;round.&rsquo;</note> the enlightened tomb of the revered &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja. On the 27th of this month it was completed, and I ordered them to take and affix it. It had been made at a cost of 110,000 rupees. As the command and leading of the victorious army of the Deccan had not been carried out to my satisfaction by my son Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Parw&imacr;z, it occurred to me to recall him, and send B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram as the advanced guard of the victorious army, inasmuch as the signs of rectitude and knowledge of affairs were evident in him, and that I myself would follow him, so that this important matter would be carried through in one and the same campaign. With this object a farman had already been sent in the name of Parw&imacr;z ordering him to start for the Subah of Allahabad, which is in the centre of my dominions. Whilst I was engaged in the campaign, he would be entrusted with the guarding and administration of that region. On the 29th of the same month a letter came from Bih&amacr;r&imacr; D&amacr;s, the news-writer of Burh&amacr;np&umacr;r, that the prince on the 20th had left the city safely and well and gone towards the aforesaid Subah. On the 1st Amurd&amacr;d I bestowed a jewelled turban on M&imacr;rz&amacr; R&amacr;ja Bh&amacr;o Singh. An elephant was conferred on the shrine of Ku&shbarb;t&imacr;g&imacr;r. On the 18th, La&shbarb;kar &Khbarb;&amacr;n had sent four ambling (<hi>r&amacr;hw&amacr;r</hi>) horses, and they were brought before me. M&imacr;r Mughal was appointed to the faujd&amacr;rship of the Sarkar of Sambal in the place of Sayyid &ayin;Abdu-l-W&amacr;ri&sumlb;, who had obtained the governorship of the Subah of Qanauj in the place of &Khbarb;aw&amacr;&sdotb;&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n. His mansab, in view of that duty, was fixed at 500 personal and horse. On the 21st the offering of R&amacr;wal Kaly&amacr;n of Jesalm&imacr;r was laid before <pb id=pb330 n=330>me; it was 3,000 muhrs, 9 horses, 25 camels, and 1 elephant. The mansab of Qizil-b&amacr;&shbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n was fixed original and increase, at 1,200 personal and 1,000 horse. On the 23rd, &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n obtained leave to go to his jagir that he might arrange the affairs of his servants and his territory, and present himself at the time agreed upon. In this year,<note n=1>Elliot, vi, 346. There is a better account of the plague in the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, pp. 88, 89.</note> or rather in the 10th year after my accession, a great pestilence appeared in some places in Hindustan. The commencement of this calamity was in the parganahs of the Panjab, and by degrees the contagion spread to the city of Lahore. Many of the people, Musulmans and Hindus, died through this. After this it spread to Sirhind and the D&umacr;&hamza;&amacr;b, until it reached Delhi and the surrounding parganahs and villages, and desolated them. At this day it had greatly diminished. It became known from men of great age and from old histories that this disease had never shown itself in this country<note n=2>The words are <hi>dar wil&amacr;yat</hi>, and may mean &lsquo;any country&rsquo; or &lsquo;any foreign country.&rsquo;</note> (before). Physicians and learned men were questioned as to its cause. Some said that it came because there had been drought for two years in succession and little rain fell: others said it was on account of the corruption of the air which occurred through the drought and scarcity. Some attributed it to other causes. Wisdom is of Allah, and we must submit to Allah&apos;s decrees!


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;What does a slave who bows not his neck to the order?&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>On 5th &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war 5,000 rupees towards her expenses were sent to the mother of M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n, the daughter of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Isma&ayin;&imacr;l II, by merchants who were proceeding to the province of Iraq. On the 6th a letter came from &ayin;&Amacr;bid &Khbarb;&amacr;n,<note n=3>The son of the historian Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n. Sir T. Roe refers to this affair.</note> bakhshi and news-writer of Ahmadabad, <pb id=pb331 n=331>to the purport that &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n Bah&amacr;dur F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang had quarrelled with him because he had recorded among (current) events certain affairs that had been unpleasing to him, and had sent a body of men against him, and had insulted him by carrying him away to his house, and had done this and that to him. This matter appeared serious to me, and I was desirous at once to cast him out of favour and ruin him. At last it occurred to me to send Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n to Ahmadabad to enquire into this matter on the spot from disinterested people to see if it had actually occurred and if so, to bring &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n with him to the Court, leaving the charge and administration of Ahmadabad to Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, his brother. Before Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n started, the news reached F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang, and he in a state of great perturbation confessed himself an offender and started for the Court on foot. Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n met him on the road, and seeing him in a strange condition, as he had wounded his feet with walking, he put him on horseback, and taking him with him came to wait on me. Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who is one of the old servants of the Court, from the time when I was a prince had continually wanted the Subah of Gujarat. It thus occurred to me that, as this kind of action on the part of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n had come about, I might fulfil the hope of an ancient servant and send him to Ahmadabad in the place of the aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n. A fortunate hour was chosen in these days, and I appointed him to be ruler of the Subah. On the 10th the mansab of Bah&amacr;dur &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Qandahar, which was 4,000 personal and 3,000 horse, was increased by 500 personal.

<p>&Shbarb;auq&imacr;, the mandolin player, is the wonder of the age. He also sings Hindi and Persian songs in a manner that clears the rust from all hearts. I delighted him with the title of &Amacr;nand &Khbarb;&amacr;n: &Amacr;nand in the Hindi language means pleasure and ease.

<pb id=pb332 n=332><p>Mangoes<note n=1>Text <hi>Anand</hi>, but this makes no sense. The I.O. MSS. have <hi>amba</hi>, mangoes, and though the remark seems abrupt this is no doubt the correct reading. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was particularly fond of mangoes, and perhaps he is here playing on the similarity between the words <hi>amba</hi> and <hi>anand</hi>.</note> used not to be in season in the country of Hindustan after the month of T&imacr;r (June&ndash;July), (but) Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n had established gardens in the parganah of Kair&amacr;na,<note n=2>In Sark&amacr;r Sah&amacr;ranpur (Jarrett, ii, 292). It is now in the Mu&zumlb;affarnagar district (I.G., vii, 308).</note> which is the native place of his ancestors, and looked after the mangoes there in such a manner as to prolong the season for more than two months, and sent them every day fresh into the special fruit store-house. As this was altogether an unusual thing to be accomplished, it has been recorded here. On the 8th a beautiful Iraq horse of the name of La&ayin;l B&imacr;-bah&amacr; (priceless ruby) was sent for Parw&imacr;z by the hand of &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f, one of his attendants.

<p>I had ordered quick-handed stone-cutters to carve full-sized figures of the R&amacr;n&amacr; and his son Karan out of marble. On this day they were completed and submitted to me. I ordered them to be taken to Agra and placed in the garden<note n=3>&ldquo;It is a pity that no trace of these is left at Agra. Had there been, they would have been the wonder of the age&rdquo; (note of Sayyid A&hdotb;mad). Perhaps they are the two figures which have generally been supposed to have been put up by Akbar and to represent Chitor heroes. The word <hi>tark&imacr;b</hi> in the text may mean that they were mounted statues. But then the description of them as marble statues would be wrong.</note> below the <hi>jharoka</hi> (exhibition-window). On the 26th the meeting for my solar weighing was held in the usual manner. The first weight came to 6,514 <hi>t&umacr;lcha</hi> of gold. I was weighed twelve times against different things; the second weighing was against quicksilver, the third against silk, the fourth against various perfumes, such as ambergris and musk, down to sandalwood, <hi>&ayin;&umacr;d</hi>, <hi>b&amacr;n</hi>, and so on, until twelve weighings were completed. Of animals, according to the number of <pb id=pb333 n=333>years that I had passed, a sheep, a goat,<note n=1>Text has <hi>g&umacr;sfand-i-nar</hi>, &lsquo;a ram,&rsquo; but the MSS. have <hi>g&umacr;sfand u bar</hi>, or buz, and it is evident that the true reading is &lsquo;a sheep, a goat.&rsquo; See Blochmann, p. 266, where goats are mentioned among the animals distributed by Akbar. The number of animals distributed corresponded with the years of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s age (48) multiplied by 3, and so would be 48 × 3 = 144 (see Blochmann, l.c.). The weight of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was 6,514 tulchas, and Blochmann (p. 267, n.) takes this to be the same as tolas, and estimates Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s weight at 210&frac12; lb. troy or 15 stone. Probably this is excessive, and his weight might be 82 sir or about 2 maunds, i.e. 164 lb. or 11&frac12; stone. The perfumes against which he was weighed were ambergris, not amber (which has no scent), <hi>&ayin;&umacr;d</hi>, i.e. lignum aloes, and <hi>b&amacr;n</hi> (not <hi>p&amacr;n</hi> as in text), which apparently is the same as <hi>lub&amacr;n</hi>, &lsquo;frankincense&rsquo; (see the chapter on perfumes in Blochmann, p. 77). I am not sure of the meaning of the phrase <hi>ba-dast nih&amacr;da</hi>. The MSS. have not the preposition <hi>ba</hi>. Perhaps the meaning is &lsquo;put them into the hands of the fakirs.&rsquo; Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r was born on the 18th &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war, 977 = 31st August, 1569. The weighings described in the text took place on the 26th &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war. Perhaps this was because his birthday was on the 24th &Shbarb;ahr&imacr;war according to the Jal&amacr;l&imacr; year.</note> and a fowl (for each year) were given to fakirs and dervishes. This rule has been observed from the time of my revered father up to the present day in this enduring State. They divide after the weighing all these things among the fakirs and those in need to the value of about 100,000 rupees.

<p>This day a ruby which Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n had purchased at Burhanpur for 65,000 rupees from &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang was laid before me, and was approved of. It is a ruby of beautiful form. The special mansab of &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am was fixed at 7,000 personal, and an order was passed that the diwani establishment should pay an equivalent to that in a <hi>tan&khbarb;w&amacr;h j&amacr;g&imacr;r</hi>. At the request of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah, what had been deducted from the mansab of Day&amacr;nat on account of former proceedings was allowed to remain as before. &ayin;A&zdotb;udu-d-daulah, who had obtained the Subah of Malwa in jagir, took his leave, and was dignified with the gift of a horse and a dress of honour. The mansab of R&amacr;wal Kaly&amacr;n of Jesalmir was fixed at 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse, <pb id=pb334 n=334>and it was ordered that that province (Jesalmir) should be given him as tankhwah. As the (auspicious) hour of his departure was on that same day, he took leave to depart for his province well pleased and exalted with the gift of a horse, an elephant, a jewelled sword, a jewelled <hi>khapwa</hi> (dagger), a robe of honour, and a special Kashmir shawl. On the 31st Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n took leave to go to Ahmadabad, and his mansab, which was 5,000 personal and 2,500 horse, was fixed at 5,000 personal and horse, and he was honoured with a dress of honour, a <hi>n&amacr;dir&imacr;</hi> (a kind of dress), a <hi>takma</hi><note n=1>Generally written <hi>ta&ghbarb;ma</hi>, &lsquo;a badge of honour,&rsquo; &lsquo;a medal,&rsquo; etc.</note> of pearls, whilst two horses from my private stable, a special elephant, and a jewelled sword were also bestowed on him. He went off to the aforesaid Subah with delight and in a state of happiness. On the 11th of Mihr, Jagat Singh, son of Kunwar Karan, came from his native place and waited on me. On the 16th, M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; Beg Akbar&shbarb;&amacr;h&imacr; came from the province of Oudh, which had been given him in jagir, and waited on me. He presented as offerings 1,000 rupees, and he produced before me an elephant which one of the zamindars of that province possessed, and which he had been ordered to take from him. On the 21st the offering of Qutbu-l-mulk, the ruler of Golcondah, consisting of some jewelled ornaments, was inspected by me. The mansab of Sayyid Q&amacr;sim B&amacr;rha was fixed, original and increase, at 1,000 personal and 600 horse. On the eve of Friday, the 22nd, M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; Beg, whose age had passed 75 years, gave up the deposit of his life. Great<note n=2>See T&umacr;zuk, p. 11, Blochmann, p. 482, and Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, iii, 355<corr>.</corr> The statement at T&umacr;zuk, p. 11, about Delhi seems a mistake, and is not in the MSS. M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr; came from Badakhshan. He is frequently mentioned in vol. iii of the Akbar-n&amacr;ma.</note> services had been performed by him for this State. His mansab rose by degrees to 4,000. He was one of the distinguished heroes of this <pb id=pb335 n=335>family (<hi>jaw&amacr;n&amacr;n-i &imacr;n ul&umacr;s</hi>)<note n=1>This is the same phrase as, according to the MSS., occurs at p. 11. Apparently the <hi>ul&umacr;s</hi> referred to is the Timuride family to which Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r belonged. It is connected with M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr;&apos;s title of Akbar&shbarb;&amacr;h&imacr;.</note> and of a noble disposition. He left neither son nor other descendants. He had the poetic temperament. As his inevitable destiny had been fulfilled<note n=2>See in Blochmann, l.c., the affecting story of his death.</note> on the day on which he went to pay his devotions at the venerated mausoleum of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n, I ordered them to bury him in the same blessed place.

<p>At the time when I gave leave to the ambassadors of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n of Bijapur, I had requested that if in that province there were a wrestler, or a celebrated swordsman, they should tell &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n to send him to me. After some time, when the ambassadors returned, they brought a Mughal, by name &Shbarb;&imacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr;, who was born at Bijapur, and was a wrestler by profession and had great experience in the art, together with certain sword-players. The performances of the latter were indifferent, but I put &Shbarb;&imacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr; to wrestle with the wrestlers and athletes who were in attendance on me, and they could none of them compete with him. One thousand rupees, a dress of honour, and an elephant were conferred on him; he was exceedingly well made, well shaped, and powerful. I retained him in my own service, and entitled him &ldquo;the athlete of the capital.&rdquo; A jagir and mansab were given him and great favours bestowed on him. On the 24th, Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been appointed to bring &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n Bah&amacr;dur F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang, brought him and waited on me, and presented as an offering 100 muhrs. On the same date R&amacr;m D&amacr;s, the son of R&amacr;ja R&amacr;j Singh, one of the Rajput Amirs who had died on duty in the Deccan, was promoted to a mansab of 1,000 personal and 500 horse. As &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n had been guilty of faults, he made B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram his intercessor, and on the 26th, in order to please him, I ordered the former <pb id=pb336 n=336>to pay his respects to me. He waited upon me with a face of complete shame, and presented as offerings 100 muhrs and 1,000 rupees. Before the coming of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s ambassadors I had made up my mind that, having sent B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram with the vanguard, I should myself proceed to the Deccan and carry out this important affair, which for some reasons had been put off. For this reason I had given an order that except the prince no one should represent to me the affairs of the rulers of the Deccan. On this day the prince brought the ambassadors and laid their representation before me. After the death of Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n and many of the auxiliary Sardars had come to Court. On this day, at the request of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah, I appointed R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n as the leader in the attack on the fort of K&amacr;ng&rdotb;a. I appointed all the men to accompany him, and according to the condition and rank of each made him happy with a present&mdash;a horse, an elephant, a robe of honour, or money&mdash;and gave them leave. After some days I conferred on &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, at the request of B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram, a jewelled dagger, as he was exceedingly broken-hearted and grieved in mind, and an order was passed that his mansab should continue as it was before, and that he should remain in attendance on my son among those appointed for duty in the Deccan. On the 3rd &Amacr;b&amacr;n I ordered the mansab of Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was in attendance on B&amacr;b&amacr; Parwiz, to be, original and increase, 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse. On the 4th, &Khbarb;usrau, who was in the charge, for safe keeping, of An&imacr;r&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; Singh-dalan, for certain considerations was handed over to &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n. I presented him with a special shawl. On the 7th (&Amacr;b&amacr;n), corresponding with the 17th &Shbarb;aww&amacr;l (28th October, 1616), a person of the name of Mu&hdotb;ammad Ri&zdotb;&amacr; Beg, whom the ruler of Persia had sent as his representative, paid his respects. After performing the dues of prostration and salutation (<hi>k&umacr;rni&shbarb;, <pb id=pb337 n=337>sijda, tasl&imacr;m</hi>), he laid before me the letter he had brought. It was decided that he should produce before me the horses and other presents he had brought with him. The written and verbal messages sent were full of friendship, brotherhood, and sincerity. I gave the ambassador on that same day a jewelled tiara (<hi>t&amacr;j</hi>) and a dress of honour. As in the letter much friendliness and affection were displayed, an exact copy is recorded in the Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r-n&amacr;ma.<note n=1>This letter being of the usual Persian style, and having nothing to do with Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s history, is omitted. It relates to the sending of Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain Cheleb&imacr; with presents to the emperor, and to the offering his services for the purchase of jewels, etc.</note>

<p>On Sunday, the 18th &Shbarb;aww&amacr;l, corresponding to the 8th &Amacr;b&amacr;n,<note n=2>Text 20th &Amacr;b&amacr;n, but the MSS. have 8th, and this is clearly right. By the latter part of the sentence Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r means that &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n was to start first, and that he himself was to leave afterwards. The &ldquo;auspicious palace&rdquo; referred to in the next sentence is apparently &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n&apos;s establishment. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r did not leave for about a fortnight. Though &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n and the establishment (<hi>daulat-&khbarb;&amacr;na-i-hum&amacr;y&umacr;n</hi>) made a start on the 8th or 9th &Amacr;b&amacr;n, he did not finally leave till the 20th &Amacr;b&amacr;n. See <hi>infra</hi>.</note> the camp equipage of my son B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram left Ajmir for the purpose of the conquest of the provinces of the Deccan, and it was decided that my son aforesaid should start by way of advanced guard, followed by the glorious standards (of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r). On Monday, the 19th, corresponding with the 9th &Amacr;b&amacr;n, when three gharis of day had passed, the auspicious palace moved in the same direction in the like manner. On the 10th the mansab of R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Mal, who had been appointed to accompany the prince, was made up, original and increase, to 2,000 personal and horse. On the night of the 19th &Amacr;b&amacr;n, after my usual custom, I was in the <hi>&ghbarb;usul-&khbarb;&amacr;na</hi>. Some of the Amirs and attendants, and by chance Mu&hdotb;ammad Ri&zdotb;&amacr; Beg, the ambassador of the ruler of Persia, were present. When six gharis had passed, an owl came and sat on top of a high terrace roof belonging to the palace, and was hardly visible, so that many men failed <pb id=pb338 n=338>to distinguish it. I sent for a gun and took aim and fired in the direction that they pointed out to me. The gun, like the decree of heaven, fell on that ill-omened bird and blew it to pieces. A shout arose from those who were present, and involuntarily they opened their lips in applause and praise. On the same night I talked with the ambassador of my brother &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s, and at last the conversation turned on the slaying of &Sdotb;af&imacr; M&imacr;rz&amacr;, his (the Shah&apos;s) eldest son. I asked him because this was a difficulty in my mind. He represented that if his slaughter had not been carried out at that time he would certainly have attempted the Shah&apos;s life. As this intention became manifest from his behaviour, the Shah was beforehand with him and ordered him to be killed. On the same day the mansab of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Hdotb;asan, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam, was fixed, original and increase, at 1,000 personal and 300 horse. The mansab of Mu&ayin;tamad &Khbarb;&amacr;n,<note n=1>Author of Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma.</note> who had been appointed to the post of paymaster of the army with B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram, was settled at 1,000 personal and 250 horse. The time for the leave-taking of B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram had been fixed as Friday, the 20th (&Amacr;b&amacr;n). At the end of this day he paraded before me the pick of his men armed and ready in the public hall of audience. Of the distinguished favours bestowed on the aforesaid son one was the title of &Shbarb;&amacr;h, which was made a part of his name. I ordered that thereafter he should be styled &Shbarb;&amacr;h Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram. I presented him with a robe of honour, a jewelled <hi>ch&amacr;rqab</hi>, the fringe and collar of which were decorated with pearls, an Iraq horse with a jewelled saddle, a Turki horse, a special elephant called Bans&imacr;-badan,<note n=2>&lsquo;Of body like Krishna, or like a flute&rsquo;?</note> a carriage, according to the English fashion,<note n=3>According to Roe, it was not the English carriage, but a copy. Perhaps Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r had the original carriage and &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n the copy.</note> for him to sit and travel about <pb id=pb339 n=339>in, a jewelled sword with a special <hi>pardala</hi> (sword-belt) that had been taken at the conquest of the fort of Ahmadnagar and was very celebrated, and a jewelled dagger. He started with great keenness. My trust in Almighty God is that in this service he may gain renown (lit. become red-faced). On each of the Amirs and mansabdars, according to his quality and degree, a horse and an elephant were conferred. Loosening a private sword from my own waist, I gave it to &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang. As Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n had been appointed to accompany the prince, I gave the duty of <hi>&ayin;ar&zdotb;-mukarrir</hi> (reviser of petitions) to &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Q&amacr;sim Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n. Previously<note n=1>Elliot, vi, 346.</note> to this a band of thieves had carried off a certain sum of money from the royal treasury in the <hi>kotw&amacr;l&imacr; chab&umacr;tara</hi> (Police Office). After some days seven men of that band, with their leader, of the name of Nawal, were caught, and a portion of that money was recovered. It occurred to me that as they had been guilty of such boldness I ought to punish them severely. Each was punished in exemplary fashion, and I ordered Nawal, the leader of them all, to be thrown under the feet of an elephant. He petitioned that if I would give the order he would fight the elephant. I ordered it to be so. They produced a very furious elephant. I bade them put a dagger into his hand and bring him in front of the elephant. The elephant several times threw him down, and each time that violent and fearless man, although he witnessed the punishments of his comrades, got up again and bravely and with a stout heart struck the elephant&apos;s trunk with the dagger, so that the animal refrained from attacking him. When I had witnessed this pluck and manliness, I ordered them to inquire into his history. After a short time, according to his evil nature and low disposition, he ran away in his longing <pb id=pb340 n=340>for his own place and abode. This annoyed me greatly, and I ordered the jagirdars of that neighbourhood to hunt him up and apprehend him. By chance he was caught a second time, and this time I ordered that ungrateful and unappreciative one to be hanged. The saying of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Mu&sdotb;li&hdotb;u-d-d&imacr;n Sa&ayin;d&imacr; accords with his case&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;In the end a wolf&apos;s cub becomes a wolf,
    <l>Although he be brought up with man.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>On Tuesday,<note n=1>The day was Saturday, not Tuesday, and it is Saturday in the MSS.</note> the 1st &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da (10th November, 1616), corresponding with the 21st &Amacr;b&amacr;n, after two watches and five gharis of the day had passed, in good condition and with a right purpose I mounted the Frank carriage, which had four horses attached to it, and left the city of Ajmir. I ordered many of the Amirs to accompany me in carriages, and at about sunset alighted at a halting-place about 1&frac34; kos distant, in the village of Deo R&amacr;y (Dor&amacr;&imacr;?).<note n=2>Elliot has Deo R&amacr;n&imacr;, and it is Deo R&amacr;n&imacr; in I.O. MS. 305.</note> It is the custom of the people of India that if the movement of kings or great men for the conquest of a country is towards the east they should ride a tusked elephant, and if the movement is towards the west on a horse of one colour; if towards the north in a palanquin or a litter (<hi>singh&amacr;san</hi>), and if towards the south, that is, in the direction of the Deccan (as on this occasion), on a <hi>rath</hi>, which is a kind of cart (<hi>ar&amacr;ba</hi>) or <hi>bahal</hi> (two-wheeled car). I had stayed at Ajmir for five days less than three years.<note n=3>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r arrived in Ajmir on the 26th &Amacr;b&amacr;n, 1022, and left it on the 21st &Amacr;b&amacr;n, 1025. The Muhammadan dates are 5th &Shbarb;aww&amacr;l, 1022, and 1st &Zbarb;&imacr;-l-qa&ayin;da, 1025 = 18th November, 1613, and 10th November, 1616.</note> They consider the city of Ajmir, which is the place of the blessed tomb of the revered &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n, to be in the second clime. Its air is nearly equable. The capital of Agra is to the east of it; on the north are the townships (district) of <pb id=pb341 n=341>Delhi, and on the south the Subah of Gujarat. On the west lie Multan and De&amacr;lp&umacr;r. The soil of this province is all sandy; water is found with difficulty in the land, and the reliance for cultivation is on moist<note n=1>Text <hi>tar</hi>, but MSS. have <hi>abtar</hi>, i.e. inferior and perhaps low land. The text seems corrupt.</note> soil and on the rainfall. The cold season is very equable, and the hot season is milder than in Agra. From this subah in time of war 86,000<note n=2>MSS. have 86,500 horse and 347,000 foot, and this agrees with the &Amacr;y&imacr;n (Jarrett, ii, 272).</note> horse and 304,000 Rajput foot are provided. There are two large lakes in this city; they call one of these the B&imacr;sal<note n=3>Text wrongly has N&imacr;l. The tank in question is the B&imacr;salya tank of the Rajputana Gazetteer, ii, 4, which was made by B&imacr;sal Deo Choh&amacr;n about 1050 <hi rend=sc>A.D.</hi> It is described in Tod&apos;s &ldquo;Personal Narrative,&rdquo; i, 824, of Calcutta reprint. It is, or was, about 8 miles in circumference and is about a mile west of the &Amacr;n&amacr;s&amacr;gar, which was made by B&imacr;sal Deo&apos;s grandson.</note> and the other the &Amacr;n&amacr;s&amacr;gar. The B&imacr;sal tank is in ruins and its embankment is broken. At this time I ordered it to be repaired. The &Amacr;n&amacr;s&amacr;gar at the time that the royal standards were there was always full of water and waves. This <hi>t&amacr;l</hi> is 1&frac12; kos and 5 <hi>&tumlb;an&amacr;b</hi> (lit. tent-ropes) (in circumference?). Whilst at Ajmir I visited nine times the mausoleum of the revered &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, and fifteen times went to look at the Pushkar lake; to the Chashma-i-N&umacr;r I went thirty-eight times. I went out to hunt tigers, etc., fifty times. I killed 15 tigers, 1 cheetah, 1 black-ear (lynx), 53 nilgaw, 33 gazelle (<hi>gawazn</hi>), 90 antelope, 80 boars, and 340 water-fowl. I encamped seven times at Deo R&amacr;y (Deo R&amacr;n&imacr;) (Dor&amacr;&imacr;?). At this halt 5 nilgaw and 12 water-fowl were killed. Marching on the 29th from Deo R&amacr;y, my camp was pitched at the village of D&amacr;s&amacr;wal&imacr;, 2 kos and 1&frac12; quarters distant from Deo R&amacr;y. On this day I gave an elephant to Mu&ayin;tamad &Khbarb;&amacr;n. I stayed the next day at this village. On this day a nilgaw was killed, and I sent two of my falcons to my son &Khbarb;urram. I marched from this village on the <pb id=pb342 n=342>3rd &Amacr;&zbarb;ar, and pitched at the village of B&amacr;dhal (M&amacr;wal?), 2&frac14; kos distant. On the road six water-fowl, etc., were killed. On the 4th, having gone 1&frac12; kos, R&amacr;msar,<note n=1>About 20 miles south-east of Ajmir.</note> which belongs to N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n Begam, became the place for the alighting of honour and glory. A halt was made at this place for eight days. In the place of &Khbarb;idmat-g&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n I here appointed Hid&amacr;yatu-llah <hi>m&imacr;r-t&umacr;zak</hi> (master of ceremonies). On the 5th day 7 antelope, 1 kulang (crane), and 15 fish were killed. The next day Jagat Singh, son of Kunwar Karan, received a horse and a robe of honour and took leave for his native place. A horse was also given to Ke&shbarb;o D&amacr;s L&amacr;l&amacr; and an elephant to Allah-d&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n Af&ghbarb;an. On the same day I killed a gazelle, 3 antelope, 7 fish, and 2 water-fowl. On that day was heard the news of the death of R&amacr;ja Sy&amacr;m Singh, who belonged to the army of Bangash. On the 7th day 3 antelope, 5 water-fowl, and a <hi>qa&shbarb;qald&amacr;&ghbarb;</hi><note n=2>This is the name of a water-bird in Turk&imacr;. It is also called <hi>m&amacr;&ghbarb;</hi> and water-crow (<hi>z&amacr;&ghbarb;-i-&amacr;b</hi>), and in Hind&imacr; <hi>jalkaw&amacr;</hi> (note of Sayyid A&hdotb;mad).</note> (coot) were killed. On Thursday and the eve of Friday, as R&amacr;msar belongs to the jagir of N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n, a feast and entertainment were prepared. Jewels, jewelled ornaments, fine cloths, sewn tapestry, and every kind of jewellery were presented as offerings. At night on all sides and in the middle of the lake, which is very broad, lamps were displayed. An excellent entertainment was arranged. In the end of the said Thursday, having also sent for the Amirs, I ordered cups for most<note n=3>Probably the meaning is that he allowed those who wished to drink to do so. Many, or at least some, would be abstainers.</note> of the servants. On my journeys by land some boats are always taken along with the victorious camp; the boatmen convey them on carts. On the day after this entertainment I went to fish in these boats, and in a short time 208 large fish came into one net. <pb id=pb343 n=343>Half of these were of the species of <hi>rak&umacr;</hi>. At night I divided them among the servants in my own presence. On the 13th &Amacr;&zbarb;ar I marched from R&amacr;msar, and hunting for 4 kos along the road, the camp was pitched at the village of Balod&amacr;.<note n=1>Nam&umacr;da in MSS.</note> Here I stayed for two days. On the 16th, moving 3&frac14; kos, I alighted at the village of Nih&amacr;l.<note n=2>Sah&amacr;l in MSS.</note> On the 18th the march was one of 2&frac14; kos. On this day I gave an elephant to Mu&hdotb;ammad Ri&zdotb;&amacr; Beg, ambassador of the ruler of Persia. The village of Jons&amacr; became the halting-place of the tents of greatness and prosperity. On the 20th I marched to the halting-place of Deog&amacr;on; I hunted along the road for a distance of 3 kos. I stayed at this place for two days, and at the end of the day went out to hunt. At this stage a strange affair was witnessed. Before the royal standards arrived at this halting-place, an eunuch went to the bank of a large tank there is in the village, and caught two young <hi>s&amacr;ras</hi>, which are a kind of crane; at night, when we stopped at this halting-place, two large saras appeared making loud cries near the ghusul-khana (parlour), which they had placed on the edge of the tank, as if somebody were exercising oppression on them. They fearlessly began their cries and came forward. It occurred to me that certainly some kind of wrong had been done to them, and probably their young had been taken. After enquiry was made the eunuch who had taken the young saras brought them before me. When the saras heard the cries of these young ones, they without control threw themselves upon them, and suspecting that they had had no food, each of the two saras placed food in the mouths of the young ones, and made much lamentation. Taking the two young ones between them, and stretching out their wings and fondling them, they went off to their nest. Marching on the 23rd 3&frac34; kos, I alighted at the <pb id=pb344 n=344>village of Bah&amacr;s&umacr; (Bh&amacr;l&umacr;?). Here there was a halt of two days, and each day I rode to hunt. On the 26th the royal standards moved and the halt was outside of the village of K&amacr;kal. A halt was made after traversing 2 kos. On the 27th the mansab of Bad&imacr;&ayin;u-z-zam&amacr;n, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, original and increased, was fixed at 1,500 personal and 750 horse. Marching on the 29th 2&frac34; kos, a halt was made at the village of L&amacr;s&amacr;, near parganah Boda.<note n=1>In Sark&amacr;r Marosor (Jarrett, ii, 208). It was in Malwa. But the I.O. MSS. have Nauda.</note> This day corresponded with the festival of Qurb&amacr;n (19th December, 1616). I ordered them to observe the ordinances of that day. From the date on which I left Ajmir up to the end of the aforesaid month, viz. the 30th &Amacr;&zbarb;ar, 67 nilgaw, antelope, etc., and 37 water-fowl etc., had been killed. A march was made from L&amacr;s&amacr; on the 2nd Day, and I marched and hunted for 3 kos 10 <hi>jar&imacr;b</hi>, and halted in the neighbourhood of the village of K&amacr;n&rdotb;&amacr;. On the 4th a march of 3&frac14; kos was made to the village of S&umacr;ra&tdotb;h. Marching 4&frac12; kos on the 6th, a halt was made near the village of Barora (Barda&rdotb;&amacr;?). On the 7th, when there was a halt, 50 water-fowl and 14 qashqaldagh (coot) were killed. The next day was a halt as well. On this day 27 water-fowl became a prey. On the 9th a march of 4&frac18; kos was made. Hunting and overthrowing prey, I alighted at the halting-place of &Khbarb;&umacr;&shbarb; T&amacr;l. At this stage a report came from Mu&ayin;tamad &Khbarb;&amacr;n that when the territory of the R&amacr;n&amacr; became the halting-place of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Khbarb;urram, though there had been no agreement to this effect (i.e. to the R&amacr;n&amacr;&apos;s meeting him), the fame and dignity of the victorious army had introduced a commotion into the pillars of his patience and firmness, and he had come and paid his respects to him when he halted at D&umacr;dp&umacr;r,<note n=2>Text &Umacr;daip&umacr;r, but this was not on the border of the R&amacr;n&amacr;&apos;s territory, and the MSS. have D&umacr;dp&umacr;r.</note> which was on the border of his jagir, <pb id=pb345 n=345>and observing all the dues and ceremonies of service he had neglected not the smallest portion of them. &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Khbarb;urram had paid him every attention, and pleased him with the gift of a dress of honour, a <hi>ch&amacr;rqab</hi>, a jewelled sword, a jewelled khapwa, Persian and Turki horses, and an elephant, and dismissed him with every honour. He had also favoured his sons and relations with dresses of honour, and out of his offering, which consisted of five elephants, twenty-seven horses, and a tray full of jewels and jewelled ornaments, had taken three horses and given back the remainder. It was settled that his son Karan should attend on the stirrup of B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram in this expedition with 1,500 horse. On the 10th the sons of R&amacr;ja Mah&amacr; Singh came from their jagir and native place (Amber) and waited on me in the neighbourhood of Ran&tdotb;ambhor, making an offering of three elephants and nine horses. Each one of them, according to his condition, received an increase of mansab. As the neighbourhood of the said fort became a halting-place for the royal standards, I released some of the prisoners who were confined in that fort. At this place I halted for two days and each day went to hunt. Thirty-eight water-fowl and qashqaldagh (coot) were taken. On the 12th I marched, and after going 4 kos halted at the village of Koyal&amacr;. On the road I killed fourteen water-fowl and an antelope. On the 14th, having traversed 3&frac34; kos, I halted in the neighbourhood of the village of Ek&tdotb;or&amacr;,<note n=1>Perhaps the Toda of Sir T. Roe.</note> killing on the road a blue bull, twelve herons (<hi>karw&amacr;nak</hi>), etc. On the same day &Amacr;&ghbarb;&amacr; F&amacr;&zdotb;il, who had been appointed deputy for I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah at Lahore, was dignified with the title of F&amacr;&zdotb;il &Khbarb;&amacr;n. At this stage they had erected the royal lodging (<hi>daulat-&khbarb;&amacr;na</hi>) on the bank of a tank, which was exceedingly bright and pleasant. On account of the pleasantness of the place <pb id=pb346 n=346>I halted two days there, and at the end of each went to hunt water-fowl. To this place the younger son of Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, by name Bahra-war, came from the fort of Ran&tdotb;ambhor, which is his father&apos;s jagir, to pay his respects to me. He had brought two elephants, both of which were included in my private stud. I promoted &Sdotb;af&imacr;, son of Am&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, to the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and, increasing his mansab, made him bakhshi and news-writer of the Subah of Gujarat. Having travelled 4&frac12; kos on the 17th, I halted at the village of Las&amacr;y&amacr;.<note n=1>Ly&amacr;sa in MSS.</note> During the halt I killed one water-fowl and twenty-three sand-grouse (<hi>durr&amacr;j</hi>). As I had sent for La&shbarb;kar &Khbarb;&amacr;n to Court on account of the disagreement that had occurred between him and &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n, I at this place appointed &ayin;&Amacr;bid &Khbarb;&amacr;n,<note n=2>Son of Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n the historian.</note> bakhshi and news-writer, in his stead. On the 19th, having made a march of 2&frac14; kos, an encampment was made in the neighbourhood of the village of K&umacr;r&amacr;ka (Kor&amacr;&nbarb;?),<note n=3>Gor&amacr;na in MSS. and the distance 2&frac14; kos and 1 <hi>jar&imacr;b</hi>.</note> which is situated on the bank of the Chambal. On account of the excellence of the place and the pleasantness of its air and water, a halt took place here for three days. Every day I sat in a boat and went to hunt water-fowl and to wander over the river. On the 22nd<note n=4>23rd in MSS.</note> there was a march, and having traversed 4&frac12; kos, shooting on the road, the victorious camp was pitched at the villages of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;np&umacr;r and Ch&imacr;la Mala (Ch&imacr;l&amacr;m&imacr;l&amacr;?). On this day of halt I bestowed on M&imacr;r&amacr;n &Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n 5,000 rupees, and gave him leave to proceed to the place assigned to him as his jagir. Another 1,000 rupees were given to &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; P&imacr;r. On the 25th I marched and hunted for 3&frac12; kos and encamped at the village of B&amacr;s&umacr;r.<note n=5>M&amacr;np&umacr;r in text.</note> According to fixed rules one halt and one march took place, and on the 27th I marched and hunted 4&frac18; kos and encamped at the village of Ch&amacr;rd&umacr;ha (Varadh&amacr;?). <pb id=pb347 n=347>Two days halt took place here. In this month of Day 416 animals were killed, namely, 97 sand-grouse (durraj), 192 qashqaldagh, 1 saras, 7 herons, 118 water-fowl, and 1 hare. On the 1st Bahman, corresponding with the 12th Muharram, 1026 (20th January, 1617), seating myself in boats with the ladies, I went forward one stage. When one ghari of day remained I arrived at the village of R&umacr;p&amacr;he&rdotb;&amacr;, the halting-place, the distance being 4 kos and 15 jarib. I shot five sand-grouse. On the same day I sent by the hands of Kaikana winter dresses of honour to twenty-one Amirs on duty in the Deccan, and ordered him to take 10,000<note n=1>MSS. 2,000 rupees.</note> rupees from those Amirs as a thanksgiving for the dresses of honour. This halting-place had much verdure and pleasantness. On the 3rd a march took place. As on the previous day, I embarked in a boat, and after traversing 2&frac18; kos the village of K&amacr;kh&amacr;-d&amacr;s (K&amacr;kh&amacr;v&amacr;s?)<note n=2>Perhaps K&amacr;nha D&amacr;s.</note> became the encamping place of the victorious camp. As I came hunting on the way, a sand-grouse fell flying into a thicket. After much search it was marked, and I ordered one of the beaters to surround the thicket and catch it, and went towards it myself. Meanwhile another sand-grouse rose, and this I made a falcon seize. Soon afterwards the beater came and laid the sand-grouse before me. I ordered them to satisfy the falcon with this sand-grouse, and to keep the one we had caught, as it was a young bird. (But) before the order reached him the head huntsman fed the falcon with the sand-grouse (the second one, viz. that which the falcon had caught). After a while the beater represented to me that if he did not kill the sand-grouse it would die (and then could not be eaten as not properly killed). I ordered him to kill it if that was the case. As he laid his sword on its throat, it with a slight movement freed itself from the sword and flew away. After I had <pb id=pb348 n=348>left the boat and mounted my horse, suddenly a sparrow (<hi>kunji&shbarb;k</hi>) by the force of the wind struck the head of an arrow that one of the beaters who was in my retinue had in his hand, and immediately fell down and died. I was amazed and bewildered at the tricks of destiny; on one side it preserved the sand-grouse, whose time had not arrived, in a short time from three such dangers, and on the other hand made captive in the hand of destruction on the arrow of fate the sparrow whose hour of death had come&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;The world-sword may move from its place,
    <l>But it will cut no vein till God wills.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>Dresses of honour for the winter had also been sent by the hand of Qar&amacr;, the <hi>yas&amacr;wul</hi> (usher), to the Amirs at Kabul. I halted at this place on account of the pleasantness of the spot and the excellence of the air. On this day there came the news of the death of N&amacr;d &ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Maid&amacr;ni at Kabul. I honoured his sons with mansabs, and at the request of Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang<note n=1>Should be Fat&hdotb;-jang as in MSS.</note> increased the mansab of R&amacr;wat &Shbarb;ankar by 500 personal and 1,000 horse. On the 6th there was a march, and going for 4&frac18; kos by the pass known as Gh&amacr;&tdotb;e Ch&amacr;nd&amacr;, the royal camp was pitched at the village of Am&hdotb;&amacr;r (Amj&amacr;r?). This valley is very green and pleasant and good trees are seen in it. Up to this stage, which is the limit of the country of the Subah of Ajmir, 84 kos had been traversed. It was also a pleasant stage. N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n Begam here shot with a gun a <hi>qar&imacr;&shbarb;a</hi>(?), the like of which for size and beauty of colour had never been seen. I ordered them to weigh it, and it came to 19 tolas and 5 mashas. The aforesaid village is the commencement of the Subah of Malwa, which is in the second clime. The length<note n=2>Jarrett, ii, 195.</note> of this Subah from the extremity of the province of Ga&rdotb;ha to the province of B&amacr;nsw&amacr;la (B&amacr;nswa&rdotb;&amacr;?) is 245 kos, and its <pb id=pb349 n=349>breadth from the parganah of Chander&imacr; to the parganah of Nandarb&amacr;r is 230 kos. On the east is the province of B&amacr;ndho, and on the north the fort of Narwar, on the south the province of Bagl&amacr;n&amacr;, and on the west the Subahs of Gujarat and Ajmir. Malwa is a large province abounding in water and of a pleasant climate. There are five rivers in it in addition to streams, canals, and springs, namely, the Godavar&imacr;,<note n=1>The name seems to be wrong. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r is evidently copying from the &Amacr;y&imacr;n, and the rivers mentioned there (Jarrett, ii, 195) are the Narbada, Sipra, K&amacr;l&imacr;sindh, Betwa, and the Kod&imacr; (or God&imacr;).</note> Bh&imacr;m&amacr;, K&amacr;l&imacr;sindh, N&imacr;r&amacr;, and Narbada. Its climate is nearly equable. The land of this province is low, but part of it is high. In the district of Dh&amacr;r, which is one of the noted places of Malwa, the vine gives grapes twice in the year, in the beginning of Pisces and the beginning of Leo, but the grapes of Pisces are the sweeter. Its husbandmen and artificers are not without arms. The revenue of the province is 24,700,000 dams. When needful there are obtained from it about 9,300<note n=2>29,668 (Jarrett, ii. 198).</note> horse and four lakhs, 70,300 foot-soldiers, with 100 elephants. On the 8th, moving on 3&frac12; kos, an encampment was made near &Khbarb;air&amacr;b&amacr;d. On the road 14 sand-grouse and 3 herons were killed, and having traversed and shot over 3 kos the camp was pitched at the village of Sidh&amacr;r&amacr;. On the 11th, while there was a halt, I mounted at the end of the day to hunt, and killed a blue bull. On the 12th, after traversing 4&frac14; kos, a halt was made at the village of Bachhay&amacr;r&imacr;. On that day R&amacr;n&amacr; Amar Singh had sent some baskets of figs. In truth it is a fine fruit, and I had never seen such delicious figs in India. But one must eat only a few of them; it does harm to eat many. On the 14th there was a march; having traversed 4&frac18; kos, I encamped at the village of Balbal&imacr;. R&amacr;ja J&amacr;nb&amacr; who is an influential zamindar in these <pb id=pb350 n=350>regions, had sent two elephants as an offering, and they were brought before me. At the same stage they brought many melons grown in K&amacr;r&imacr;z near Herat. &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam had also sent 50 camels. In former years they had never brought melons in such abundance. On one tray they brought many kinds of fruit&mdash;K&amacr;r&imacr;z melons, melons from Badakhshan and Kabul, grapes from Samarkand<note n=1>The MSS. also have sweet pomegranates from Yezd, and sub-acid (<hi>may-&khbarb;wu&shbarb;</hi>) ones from Far&amacr;h, and pears from Badakhshan (see Elliot, vi, 348).</note> and Badakhshan, apples from Samarkand, Kashmir, Kabul, and from Jalalabad, which is a dependency of Kabul, and pineapples, a fruit that comes from the European ports, plants of which have been set in Agra. Every year some thousands are gathered in the gardens there which appertain to the private domains (<hi>&khbarb;&amacr;li&sdotb;a-i-&shbarb;ar&imacr;fa</hi>)<note n=2>The MSS. have <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;&sdotb;&sdotb;a-i-&shbarb;ar&imacr;fa</hi>.</note>; <hi>kaula</hi>,<note n=3>Qu. <hi>komla</hi>? Instead of <hi>q&amacr;biltar</hi> the MSS. have <hi>m&amacr;&hamza;iltar</hi>.</note> which are similar in form to an orange, but smaller and better in flavour. They grow very well in the Subah of Bengal. In what language can one give thanks for such favours? My revered father had a great liking for fruit, especially for melons, pomegranates, and grapes. During his time the K&amacr;r&imacr;z melons, which are the finest kind, and pomegranates from Yezd, which are celebrated throughout the world and Samarkand grapes had not been brought to Hindustan. Whenever I see these fruits they cause me great regret. Would that such fruit had come in those days, so that he might have enjoyed them!

<p>On the 15th, which was a halting day, news came of the death of M&imacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr;, son of Far&imacr;d&umacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Barl&amacr;s, who was one of the trusted <hi>am&imacr;r-z&amacr;das</hi> (descended from amirs) of this family (the Timurides). On the 16th a march took place. Having traversed 4&frac18; kos, the camp of heavenly dignity was pitched near the village of Gir&imacr;. On the road the scouts brought news that there was <pb id=pb351 n=351>a lion in this neighbourhood. I went to hunt him and finished him with one shot. As the braveness of the lion (<hi>sh&imacr;r babar</hi>) has been established, I wished to look at his intestines. After they were extracted, it appeared that in a manner contrary to other animals, whose gall-bladder is outside their livers, the gall-bladder of the lion is within his liver(?). It occurred to me that the courage of the lion may be from this cause. On the 18th, after traversing 2&frac34; kos, the village of Amriy&amacr; was our halting-place. On the 19th, which was a halt, I went out to hunt. After going 2 kos, a village came to view exceedingly sweet and pleasant. Nearly 100 mango-trees were seen in one garden; I had seldom seen mango-trees so large and green and pleasant. In the same garden I saw a <hi>bar</hi>-tree (a banyan), exceedingly large. I ordered them to measure its length, breadth, and height in yards (<hi>gaz</hi>). Its height from the surface to the highest branch (<hi>sar-&shbarb;&amacr;&khbarb;</hi>) was 74 cubits (<hi>&zumlb;ira&ayin;</hi>). The circumference of its trunk was 44&frac12; cubits and its breadth<note n=1><hi>Pahn&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;.</hi> Its area or shade. Perhaps the 175&frac12; are yards, not cubits.</note> 175&frac12; measured by the gaz. This has been recorded as it is very unusual. On the 20th was a march, and on the road a blue bull was shot with a gun. On the 21st, which was a halt, I went out to hunt at the end of the day. After returning, I came to the house of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah for the festival of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &Khbarb;i&zdotb;r, whom they call &Khbarb;i&zdotb;r&imacr;; I remained there till a watch of the night had passed, and then feeling inclined for food I went back to the royal quarters. On this day I honoured I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah as an intimate friend by directing the ladies of the harem not to veil their faces from him. By this favour I bestowed everlasting honour on him. On the 22nd an order was given to march, and after 3&frac18; kos were traversed the camp was pitched at the village of B&umacr;lghar&imacr; (Nawalkhe&rdotb;&imacr;?). On the road two blue <pb id=pb352 n=352>bulls were killed. On the 23rd day of T&imacr;r, which was a halt, I killed a blue bull with a gun. On the 24th, traversing 5 kos, the village of Q&amacr;sim-khe&rdotb;&amacr; was the halting-place. On the road a white animal<note n=1>Evidently the four-horned antelope, the <hi>Tetracerus quadricornis</hi> of Blanford, p. 520, and which has the Hindustani name of <hi>doda</hi>. Blanford describes its colour as dull pale brown. &ldquo;The posterior horns are much larger than the anterior ones, which are situated between the orbits and are often mere knobs. It is the only Indian representative of the <hi>duikarbok</hi> of Africa. Another Indian name is <hi>chausingha</hi>. In jungle this species and the hog-deer may easily be mistaken the one for the other. It is not gregarious, and moves with a peculiar jerky action.&rdquo; The resemblance between the four-horned antelope and the hog-deer&mdash;the <hi>k&umacr;t&amacr;h p&amacr;ycha</hi> or short-legged deer of B&amacr;bar and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&mdash;may account for Blanford&apos;s giving <hi>doda</hi> as a native name for the hog-deer (<hi>Cervus porcinus</hi>). For B&amacr;bar&apos;s description of the <hi>k&umacr;t&amacr;h p&amacr;ya</hi> or <hi>p&amacr;ycha</hi> see Erskine, p. 317. Gladwin in his history of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r writes the native name as <hi>Dirdhayan</hi>.</note> was killed, which resembled the <hi>k&umacr;t&amacr;h p&amacr;ya</hi> (hog-deer); it had four horns, two of which were opposite the extremities of its eyes, and two finger-breadths in height, and the two other horns four finger-breadths towards the nape of the neck. These were four finger-breadths in height. The people of India call this animal <hi>d&umacr;dh&amacr;dh&amacr;r&imacr;t</hi> (<hi>dudh&amacr;riy&amacr;</hi>?). The male has four horns and the female none. It was said that this kind of antelope has no gall-bladder, but when they looked at its intestines the gall-bladder was apparent, and it became clear that this report has no foundation. On the 25th, which was a halt, at the end of the day I rode out to hunt and killed a female nilgaw with my gun. B&amacr;lj&umacr;, nephew of Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who held the mansab of 1,000 personal and 850 horse, and had a jagir in Oudh, I promoted to 2,000 personal and 1,200 horse, dignified him with the title of Qil&imacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and appointed him to the Subah of Bengal. On the 26th a march took place, and after traversing 4&frac34; kos a halt was made at the village of Dih Q&amacr;&zdotb;iy&amacr;n, which is in the neighbourhood of Ujjain. A number of mango-trees in this place had blossomed. They had pitched the <pb id=pb353 n=353>tents on the bank of a lake, and had prepared an enchanting place. Pah&amacr;&rdotb;, son of &Ghbarb;azn&imacr;n<note n=1>Blochmann, p. 493.</note> &Khbarb;&amacr;n, was capitally punished at this stage. Cherishing this unlucky one after the death of his father, I had given him the fort and province of J&amacr;laur, which was the place of his ancestors. As he was of tender years, his mother used to forbid him certain evil practices. That eternally black-faced one with some of his companions one night came into the house and killed his own full mother with his own hand. This news reached me and I ordered them to bring him. After his crime was proved against him, I ordered them to put him to death (<hi>kih ba biy&amacr;s&amacr; ras&amacr;n&imacr;dand</hi>). At this halting-place a tamarind<note n=2>Text, <hi>&khbarb;urm&amacr;</hi>, a date, but evidently the <hi>&khbarb;urm&amacr;-i-Hind</hi> or the tamarind, i.e. &lsquo;the palm of India,&rsquo; is meant (see B&amacr;bar&apos;s Mem., Erskine, p. 324). I do not understand the measurements. The word <hi>yak</hi>, &lsquo;one,&rsquo; before the word <hi>&shbarb;&amacr;&khbarb;</hi> is not in the MSS. and is, I think, wrong. I think the 16 gaz and 15&frac12; gaz are the lengths of the two branches, and that the measurements 2&frac12; and 2&frac34; gaz refer to the length and circumference of the two branches at the place when they started from the trunk and before they put out leaves.</note>-tree came to view, the form and habit of which were somewhat strange. The original tree had one trunk; when it had grown to 6 gaz, it turned into two branches, one of which was 10 and the other 9&frac12; gaz. The distance between the two branches was 4&frac12; gaz. From the ground to the place where the branches and leaves came to an end(?), there were on the side of the large branch 16 gaz, and on the other branch 15&frac12; gaz. From the place whence the branches and green leaves began(?) to the top (trunk?) of the tree was 2&frac12; gaz, and the circumference was 2&frac34; gaz. I ordered them to make a <hi>chab&umacr;tara</hi> (platform) round it of the height of 3 gaz. As the trunk was very straight and well-shaped, I told my artists to depict it in the illustrations to the Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r-n&amacr;ma. A march was made on the 27th. After traversing 2&frac18; kos, a halt was made <pb id=pb354 n=354>at the village of Hinduw&amacr;l<note n=1>Hindwas or Hind&amacr;was in MSS.</note>; on the road a blue bull was killed. On the 28th, after traversing 2 kos, the village of K&amacr;liy&amacr;daha became the halting-place. K&amacr;liy&amacr;daha is a building which was made by N&amacr;siru-d-d&imacr;n, son of &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n, son of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d &Khbarb;alj&imacr;, who was ruler of Malwa. In the time of his rule he had made it in the neighbourhood of Ujjain, which is one of the most celebrated cities in the Subah of Malwa. They say that the heat overcame him so much that he passed his time in the water. He made this building in the middle of the river, and divided its waters into canals, and brought the water on all sides, as well as inside and outside, of the house, and made large and small reservoirs suited to the place. It is a very pleasant and enjoyable place, and one of the noted habitations of Hindustan. Before it was decided to halt at this place I sent architects and ordered them to clean up the place again. On account of its pleasantness I remained in this place for three days. At the same place &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n came from his jagir and waited on me. Ujjain is one of the old cities, and is one of the seven established places of worship of the Hindus. R&amacr;ja Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, who introduced the observation of the heavens and stars into Hindustan, lived in this city and province. From the time of his observations until now, which is the 1026th Hijra year (1617 <hi rend=sc>A.D.</hi>) and the 11th year from my accession, 1,675<note n=2>This is in accordance with and probably derived from B&amacr;bar&apos;s Commentaries, Erskine, p. 51, where he says that 1,584 years have elapsed from the time when Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t made his observatory. Erskine takes this to show that B&amacr;bar was writing in 934, and if we add 92 years, or the difference between 934 and 1026, we get 1,676 years (or 1,675 if we take the year to be 1025).</note> years have passed. The deductions of the astronomers of India are all based on his observations. This city is on the bank of the River Sipra. The belief<note n=3>See Jarrett, ii, 196. Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l says there that the flow occurred a week before his arrival at Ujjain.</note> of the <pb id=pb355 n=355>Hindus is that once in some year at an uncertain time the water of this river turns into milk. In the reign of my revered father, at the time when he had sent Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l to set in order the affairs of my brother &Shbarb;&amacr;h Mur&amacr;d, he sent a report from that city that a large body of Hindus and Musulmans had borne testimony that some days previously at night this river had become milk, so that people who took water from it that night found in the morning their pots full of milk.<note n=1>Cf. Jarrett, ii, 196.</note> As this obtained currency it has been recorded, but my intelligence will in no way agree to it. The real truth of this affair is known to Allah. On the 2nd Isfand&amacr;rmu&zbarb; I embarked in a boat from K&amacr;liy&amacr;daha, and went to the next stage. I had frequently heard that an austere Sany&amacr;s&imacr;<note n=2><hi>Sany&amacr;s&imacr;-i-murt&amacr;&zdotb;.</hi></note> of the name of Jadr&umacr;p many years ago retired from the city of Ujjain to a corner of the desert and employed himself in the worship of the true God. I had a great desire for his acquaintance, and when I was at the capital of Agra I was desirous of sending for and seeing him. In the end, thinking of the trouble it would give him, I did not send for him. When I arrived in the neighbourhood of the city I alighted from the boat and went &frac18; kos on foot to see him. The place he had chosen to live in was a hole on the side of a hill which had been dug out and a door made. At the entrance there is an opening in the shape of a <hi>mi&hdotb;r&amacr;b</hi>,<note n=3>Text, <hi>mi&hdotb;r&amacr;b&imacr;-&shbarb;akl uft&amacr;da</hi>, &lsquo;a place like a prayer-niche.&rsquo; Possibly the true reading is <hi>majr&amacr; b&imacr;-&shbarb;akl uft&amacr;da</hi>, &lsquo;a passage without form.&rsquo; However, the MSS. have <hi>mi&hdotb;r&amacr;b</hi>. The account in the text may be compared with the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, i, 574, and with the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 94. The measurements of the mouth of the hole in the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir are taken from the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, and differ from the account in the T&umacr;zuk. The Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, following the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, calls the ascetic Achhad or Ajhad. It also gives his subsequent history. He went to Mathura and was there cruelly beaten by &Hdotb;&amacr;kim Beg. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s visit to Jadr&umacr;p is referred to by Sir Thomas Roe, who mentions a report that the saint was said to be 300 years old. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r does not say any such nonsense.</note> which <pb id=pb356 n=356>is in length (? height) 1 gaz and in breadth 10 <hi>gira</hi>, (knots, each &frac116; of a gaz), and the distance from this door to a hole which is his real abode is 2 gaz and 5 knots in length and in breadth 11&frac14; knots. The height from the ground to the roof is 1 gaz and 3 knots. The hole whence is the entrance to the abode is in length 5&frac12; knots and its breadth 3&frac12; knots. A person of weak body (thin?) can only enter it with a hundred difficulties. The length and breadth of the hole are such. It has no mat and no straw. In this narrow and dark hole he passes his time in solitude. In the cold days of winter, though he is quite naked, with the exception of a piece of rag that he has in front and behind, he never lights a fire. The Mulla of R&umacr;m (Jal&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n) has put into rhyme the language of a dervish&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;By day our clothes are the sun,
    <l>By night our mattress and blanket the moon&apos;s rays.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>He bathes twice a day in a piece of water near his abode, and once a day goes into the city of Ujjain, and nowhere but to the houses of three brahmins whom he has selected out of seven, who have wives and children and whom he believes to have religious feelings and contentment. He takes by way of alms five mouthfuls of food out of what they have prepared for their own eating, which he swallows without chewing, in order that he may not enjoy their flavour; always provided that no misfortune has happened to their three houses, that there has been no birth, and there be no menstruous woman in the house. This is his method of living, just as it is now written. He does not desire to associate with men, but as he has obtained great notoriety people go to see him. He is not devoid of knowledge, for he has thoroughly mastered the science of the Ved&amacr;nta, which is the science of Sufism. I conversed with him for six gharis; he spoke well, so much so as to make a great impression on me. My society also suited him. <pb id=pb357 n=357>At the time when my revered father conquered the fort of &Amacr;s&imacr;r, in the province of Khandesh, and was returning to Agra, he saw him in the very same place, and always remembered him well.

<p>The learned of India have established four modes of life for the caste of brahmins, which is the most honoured of the castes of Hindus, and have divided their lives into four periods. These four periods they call the four <hi>&amacr;sram</hi>.<note n=1>See Jarrett, iii, 271, etc. The Sanskrit word is &Amacr;srama, or &Amacr;&shbarb;rama.</note> The boy who is born in a brahmin&apos;s house they do not call brahmin till he is 7 years old, and take no trouble on the subject. After he has arrived at the age of 8 years, they have a meeting and collect the brahmins together. They make a cord of <hi>m&umacr;nj</hi> grass, which they call <hi>m&umacr;nj&imacr;</hi>, in length 2&frac14; gaz, and having caused prayers and incantations to be repeated over it, and having had it made into three strands, which they call <hi>sih tan</hi>, by one in whom they have confidence, they fasten it on his waist. Having woven a <hi>zunn&amacr;r</hi> (girdle or thread) out of the loose threads, they hang it over his right<note n=2>Left shoulder in &Amacr;y&imacr;n.</note> shoulder. Having given into his hand a stick of the length of a little over 1 gaz to defend himself with from hurtful things and a copper vessel for drinking-water, they hand him over to a learned brahmin that he may remain in his house for twelve years, and employ himself in reading the Vedas, which they believe in as God&apos;s book. From this day forward they call him a brahmin. During this time it is necessary that he should altogether abstain from bodily pleasures. When midday is passed he goes as a beggar to the houses of other brahmins, and bringing what is given him to his preceptor, eats it with his permission. For clothing, with the exception of a loin cloth (<hi>lung&imacr;</hi>) of cotton to cover his private parts, and 2 or 3 more gaz of cotton <pb id=pb358 n=358>which he throws over his back, he has nothing else. This state is called <hi>brahmacharya</hi>, that is, being busied with the Divine books. After this period has passed, with the leave of his preceptor and his father, he marries, and is allowed to enjoy all the pleasures of his five senses until the time when he has a son who shall have attained the age of 16 years. If he does not have a son, he passes his days till he is 48 in the social life. During this time they call him a <hi>grihast</hi>, that is, householder. After that time, separating himself from relatives, connections, strangers, and friends, and giving up all things of enjoyment and pleasure, he retires to a place of solitude from the place of attachment to sociality (<hi>ta&ayin;alluq-i-&amacr;b&amacr;d-i-ka&sumlb;rat</hi>), and passes his days in the jungle. They call this condition <hi>b&amacr;nprasta</hi>,<note n=1>Sanskrit, V&amacr;naprastha.</note> that is, abode in the jungle. As it is a maxim of the Hindus that no good deed can be thoroughly performed by men in the social state without the partnership of the presence of a wife, whom they have styled the half of a man, and as a portion of the ceremonies and worshippings is yet before him (has to be accomplished), he takes his wife with him into the jungle. If she should be pregnant, he puts off his going until she bear a child and it arrive at the age of 5 years. Then he entrusts the child to his eldest son or other relation, and carries out his intention. In the same way, if his wife be menstruous, he puts off going until she is purified. After this he has no connection with her, and does not defile himself with communication with her, and at night he sleeps apart.<note n=2>Text <hi>qa&tumlb;&ayin;&imacr; dar miy&amacr;n &amacr;lat nih&amacr;da</hi>, but apparently this should be <hi>&amacr;lat qa&tumlb;&ayin; ba miy&amacr;n nih&amacr;da</hi>: that is, &ldquo;<foreign lang=la>membrum virile in involucris reponens</foreign>.&rdquo;</note> He passes twelve years in this place, and lives on vegetables which may have sprung up of themselves in the desert and jungle. He keeps his zunnar by him and worships fire. He does not waste his time in looking <pb id=pb359 n=359>after his nails or the hair of his head, or in trimming his beard and moustaches. When he completes this period in the manner related, he returns to his own house, and having commended his wife to his children and brothers and sons-in-law, goes to pay his respects to his spiritual guide, and burns by throwing into the fire in his presence whatever he has in the way of a zunnar, the hair of his head, etc., and says to him: &ldquo;Whatever attachment (<hi>ta&ayin;alluq</hi>) I may have had, even to abstinence and worshipping and will, I have rooted up out of my heart.&rdquo; Then he closes the road to his heart and to his desires and is always employed in contemplation of God, and knows no one except the True Cause of Being (God). If he speak of science it is the science of Ved&amacr;nta, the purport of which B&amacr;b&amacr; Fi&ghbarb;&amacr;n&imacr; has versified in this couplet&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;There&apos;s one lamp in this house, by whose rays
    <l>Wherever I look there is an assembly.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>They call this state <hi>sarvabiy&amacr;s</hi>,<note n=1>Text, <hi>sarb biy&amacr;s&imacr;</hi>, which may mean &lsquo;distributing everything.&rsquo; The Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 96, has <hi>sarb n&amacr;s&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;destroying everything.&rsquo;</note> that is, giving up all. They call him who possesses it <hi>sarvabiy&amacr;s&imacr;</hi>.

<p>After interviewing Jadr&umacr;p I mounted an elephant and passed through the town of Ujjain, and as I went scattered to the right and left small coins to the value of 3,500 rupees, and proceeding 1&frac34; kos alighted at D&amacr;&hamza;&umacr;d-&khbarb;e&rdotb;&amacr;, the place where the royal camp was pitched. On the 3rd day, which was a halting day, I went, from desire for association with him, after midday, to see Jadr&umacr;p, and for six gharis enjoyed myself in his company. On this day also he uttered good words, and it was near evening when I entered my palace. On the 4th day I journeyed 3&frac14; kos and halted at the village of Jar&amacr;o<note n=2>I.O. MS. No. 306 says nothing about a garden, but speaks of a village Khirw&amacr;r and of halting under a mango-tree. Nor does No. 305 mention a garden.</note> <pb id=pb360 n=360>in the P&amacr;r&amacr;niy&amacr; garden. This is also a very pleasant halting-place, full of trees. On the 6th there was a march; after proceeding for 4&frac34; kos I halted on the bank of the lake of Deb&amacr;lp&umacr;r Bheriy&amacr;. On account of the pleasantness of the place and the delights of the lake, I halted at this stage for four days, and at the end of each day, embarking in a boat, employed myself in shooting ducks (<hi>mur&ghbarb;&amacr;b&imacr;</hi>) and other aquatic animals. At this halting-place they brought <hi>fa&khbarb;r&imacr;</hi> grapes from Ahmadnagar. Although they are not as large as the Kabul fakhri grapes, they do not yield to them in sweetness.

<p>At the request of my son B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram the mansab of Bad&imacr;&ayin;u-z-zam&amacr;n, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, was fixed at 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse. On the 11th I marched, and after proceeding for 3&frac14; kos halted in the parganah Daulatabad. On the 12th, which was a halt, I rode out to hunt. In the village of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;&umacr;p&umacr;r, which belonged to the said parganah, I saw a very large and bulky banyan-tree, measuring round its trunk 18&frac12; gaz, and in height from the root to the top of the branches 128&frac14; cubits. The branches spread a shade for 203&frac12; cubits. The length of a branch, on which they have represented the tusks of an elephant, was 40 gaz. At the time when my revered father passed by this, he had made an impression of his hand by way of a mark at the height of 3&frac34; gaz from the ground. I ordered them also to make the mark of my hand 8 gaz above another root. In order that these two hand-marks might not be effaced in the course of time, they were carved on a piece of marble and fastened on to the trunk of the tree. I ordered them to place a <hi>chab&umacr;tara</hi> and platform round the tree.

<p>As at the time when I was prince I had promised M&imacr;r &Zdotb;iy&amacr;&hamza;u-d&imacr;n Qazw&imacr;n&imacr;, who was one of the Saif&imacr; Sayyids, and whom during my reign I have honoured with the <pb id=pb361 n=361>title of Mu&sdotb;&tumlb;af&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, to give the parganah of Maldah, which is a famous parganah in Bengal, to him and his descendants<note n=1>Cf. Elliot, vi, 348. The MSS. say nothing about two sons.</note> in <hi>&amacr;l tam&ghbarb;&amacr;</hi> (perpetual royal grant), this great gift was bestowed in his honour at this halting-place. On the 13th a march took place. Going separately from this camp to look round the country and hunt with some of the ladies and intimates and servants, I proceeded to the village of &Hdotb;&amacr;&sdotb;ilp&umacr;r, and whilst the camp was pitched in the neighbourhood of N&amacr;lcha (B&amacr;lchha?) I halted at the village of S&amacr;ngor. What shall be written of the beauty and sweetness of this village? There were many mango-trees, and its lands were altogether green and delightful. On account of its greenness and pleasantness I halted here for three days. I gave this village to Kam&amacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the huntsman, in place of Ke&shbarb;o D&amacr;s M&amacr;r&umacr;. An order was passed that they should hereafter call it Kam&amacr;lp&umacr;r. At this same halting-place occurred the night of &Shbarb;&imacr;vr&amacr;t (Shivr&amacr;tri). Many Jogis collected. The ceremonies of this night were duly observed, and I met the learned of this body in social intercourse. In these days I shot three blue bulls. The news of the killing of R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n reached me at this place. I had appointed him to head the army that had been sent against the fort of K&amacr;ng&rdotb;&amacr;. When he arrived at Lahore he heard that Sangr&amacr;m, one of the zamindars of the hill-country of the Panjab, had attacked his place and taken possession of part of his province. Considering it of the first importance to drive him out, he went against him. As Sangr&amacr;m had not the power to oppose him, he left the country of which he had taken possession and took refuge in difficult hills and places. R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n pursued him there, and in his great pride, not looking to the means by which he himself could advance and retreat, came up to him with <pb id=pb362 n=362>a small force. When Sangr&amacr;m saw that he had no way to flee by, in accordance with this couplet&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;In time of need when no (way of) flight is left,
    <l>The hand seizes the edge of the sharp sword.&rdquo;<note n=1>From the &ldquo;Gulist&amacr;n.&rdquo;</note>
</lg>


<p>A fight took place, and according to what was decreed, a bullet struck R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n and he delivered his soul to the Creator thereof. His men were defeated and a great number of them killed. The remainder, wounded, abandoned their horses and arms, and with a hundred alarms escaped half-dead.

<p>On the 17th I marched from S&amacr;ngor, and after proceeding 3 kos came again to the village of &Hdotb;&amacr;&sdotb;ilp&umacr;r. On the road a blue bull was killed. This village is one of the noted places in the Subah of Malwa. It has many vines and mango-trees without number. It has streams flowing on all sides of it. At the time I arrived there were grapes contrary to the season in which they are in the Wil&amacr;yat (Persia or Afghanistan). They were so cheap and plentiful that the lowest and meanest could get as much as they desired. The poppy had flowered and showed varied colours. In brief, there are few villages so pleasant. For three days more I halted in this village. Three blue bulls were killed with my gun. From &Hdotb;&amacr;&sdotb;ilp&umacr;r on the 21st in two marches I rejoined the big camp. On the road a blue bull was killed. On Sunday, the 22nd, marching from the neighbourhood of N&amacr;lcha (B&amacr;lchha?), I pitched at a lake that is at the foot of the fort of M&amacr;nd&umacr;. On that day the huntsmen brought news that they had marked down a tiger within 3 kos. Although it was Sunday, and on these two days, viz. Sunday and Thursday, I do not shoot, it occurred to me that as it is a noxious animal it ought to be done away with. I proceeded towards him, and when I arrived at the place it was sitting <pb id=pb363 n=363>under the shade of a tree. Seeing its mouth, which was half open, from the back of the elephant, I fired my gun. By chance it entered its mouth and found a place in its throat and brain, and its affair was finished with that one shot. After this the people who were with me, although they looked for the place where the tiger was wounded, could not find it, for on none of its limbs was there any sign of a gunshot wound. At last I ordered them to look in its mouth. From this it was evident that the bullet had entered its mouth and that it had been killed thereby. M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam had killed a male wolf and brought it. I wished to see whether its gall-bladder was in its liver like that of the tiger, or like other animals outside its liver. After examination it was clear that the gall-bladder was also inside the liver. On Monday, the 23rd, when one watch had passed in a fortunate ascension and a benign hour, I mounted an elephant and approached the fort of M&amacr;nd&umacr;. When a watch and three gharis of day had passed, I entered the houses which they had prepared for the royal accommodation. I scattered 1,500 rupees on the way. From Ajmir to M&amacr;nd&umacr;, 159 kos, in the space of four months and two days, in forty-six marches and seventy-eight halts, had been traversed. In these forty-six marches our halts were made on the banks of tanks or streams or large rivers in pleasant places which were full of trees and poppy-fields in flower, and no day passed that I did not hunt while halting or travelling. Riding on horseback or on an elephant I came along the whole way looking about and hunting, and none of the difficulties of travelling were experienced; one might say that there was a change from one garden to another. In these huntings there were always present with me &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam, M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n, An&imacr;r&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;, Hid&amacr;yatu-llah, R&amacr;ja S&amacr;rang Deo, Sayyid K&amacr;s&umacr;, and &Khbarb;aw&amacr;&sdotb;&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n. As before the arrival of the royal standards in these <pb id=pb364 n=364>regions I had sent &ayin;Abdu-l-Kar&imacr;m, the architect, to look to the repair of the buildings of the old rulers in M&amacr;nd&umacr;, he during the time the camp halted at Ajmir had repaired some of the old buildings that were capable of repair, and had altogether rebuilt some places. In short, he had made ready a house the like of which for pleasantness and sweetness has probably not been made anywhere else. Nearly 300,000 rupees, or 2,000 Persian tumans, were expended on this. There should be such grand buildings in all great cities as might be fit for royal accommodation. This fort is on the top of a hill 10 kos in circumference; in the rainy season there is no place with the fine air and pleasantness of this fort. At nights, in the season of the <hi>qalbu-l-asad</hi> (Cor leonis of Regulus, the star <GR>a</GR> of Leo), it is so cold that one cannot do without a coverlet, and by day there is no need for a fan (<hi>b&amacr;d-zan</hi>). They say<note n=1>Cf. Jarrett, ii, 197. The story is also told with many more details in Price&apos;s Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, p. 108 etc.</note> that before the time of R&amacr;ja Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t there was a Raja of the name of Jai Singh Deo. In his time a man had gone into the fields to bring grass. While he was cutting it, the sickle he had in his hand appeared to be of the colour of gold. When he saw that his sickle had been transmuted, he took it to a blacksmith of the name of M&amacr;dan<note n=2>Text, <hi>M&amacr;dan</hi>. But the name is <hi>M&amacr;ndan</hi>, as MS. No. 181 and the &Amacr;y&imacr;n-i-Akbar&imacr; (Jarrett, ii, 197) show. The legend is intended to show how M&amacr;nd&umacr; got its name (see also Tiefenthaler, i, 353).</note> to be repaired. The blacksmith knew the sickle had been turned into gold. It had before this been heard that there was in this country the alchemist&apos;s stone (<hi>sang-i-p&amacr;ras</hi>), by contact with which iron and copper became gold. He immediately took the grass-cutter with him to that place and procured the stone. After this he brought to the Raja of the time this priceless jewel. The Raja by means of this stone made gold, and spent part of it on the buildings of this fort <pb id=pb365 n=365>and completed them in the space of twelve years. At the desire of that blacksmith he caused them to cut into the shape of an anvil most of the stones that were to be built into the wall of the fort. At the end of his life, when his heart had given up the world, he held an assembly on the bank of the Narbada, which is an object of worship among the Hindus, and, assembling brahmins, made presents to each of cash and jewels. When the turn of a brahmin came who had long been associated with him, he gave this stone into his hand. He from ignorance became angry and threw the priceless jewel into the river. After he came to know the true state of the affair he was a captive to perpetual sorrow. However much he searched, no trace of it was found. These things are not written in a book; they have been heard, but my intelligence in no way accepts this story. It appears to me to be all delusion. M&amacr;nd&umacr;<note n=1>Elliot, vi. 348.</note> is one of the famous Sarkars of the Subah of Malwa. Its revenue is 1,390,000 dams. It was for a long time the capital of the kings of this country. There are many buildings and traces of former kings in it, and up till now it has not fallen into ruin.

<p>On the 24th I rode to go round and see the buildings of the old kings, and went first to the J&amacr;mi&ayin; mosque, which is one built by Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n H&umacr;&shbarb;ang &Ghbarb;&umacr;r&imacr;. A very lofty building came to view, all of cut stone, and although 180 years have passed since the time of its building, it is as if the builder had just withdrawn his hand from it. After this I went to the building containing the tombs of the &Khbarb;alj&imacr; rulers. The grave of Na&sdotb;&imacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n, son of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n, whose face is blackened for ever, was also there. It is well known that that wretch advanced himself by the murder of his own father, &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n, who was in his 80th year. Twice <pb id=pb366 n=366>he gave him poison, and he twice expelled it by means of a <hi>zahr-muhra</hi> (poison antidote, bezoar) he had on his arm. The third time he mixed poison in a cup of sherbet and gave it to his father with his own hand, saying he must drink it. As his father understood what efforts he was making in this matter, he loosened the zahr-muhra from his arm and threw it before him, and then turning his face in humility and supplication towards the throne of the Creator, who requires no supplication, said: &ldquo;O Lord, my age has arrived at 80 years, and I have passed this time in prosperity and happiness such as has been attained to by no king. Now as this is my last time, I hope that Thou wilt not seize Na&sdotb;&imacr;r for my murder, and that reckoning my death as a thing decreed Thou wilt not avenge it.&rdquo; After he had spoken these words, he drank off that poisoned cup of sherbet at a gulp and delivered his soul to the Creator. The meaning of his preamble was that he had passed the time of his reign in enjoyment such as has not been attained to by any of the kings. When in his 48th year he came to the throne, he said to his intimates and those near him, &ldquo;In the service of my revered father I have passed thirty years in warfare and have committed no fault in my activity as a soldier; now that my turn to reign has arrived, I have no intention to conquer countries, but desire to pass the remainder of my life in ease and enjoyment.&rdquo; They say that he had collected 15,000 women in his harem. He had a whole city of them, and had made it up of all castes, kinds, and descriptions&mdash;artificers, magistrates, qazis, kotwals, and whatever else is necessary for the administration of a town. Wherever he heard of a virgin possessed of beauty, he would not desist (lit. did not sit down from his feet) until he possessed her. He taught the girls all kinds of arts and crafts, and was much inclined to hunt. He had made a deer park and collected all kinds of animals in it. <pb id=pb367 n=367>He often used to hunt in it with his women. In brief, in the period of thirty-two years of his reign, as he had determined, he went against no enemy, and passed this time in ease and enjoyment. In the same way no one invaded his country. It is reported that when &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the Afghan, in the time of his rule, came to the tomb of Na&sdotb;&imacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n, he, in spite of his brutish nature, on account of Na&sdotb;&imacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n&apos;s shameful conduct, ordered the head of the tomb to be beaten with sticks. Also when I went to his tomb I gave it several kicks, and ordered the servants in attendance on me to kick the tomb. Not satisfied with this, I ordered the tomb to be broken open and his impure remains to be thrown into the fire. Then it occurred to me that since fire is Light, it was a pity for the Light of Allah to be polluted with burning his filthy body; also, lest there should be any diminution of torture for him in another state from being thus burnt, I ordered them to throw his crumbled bones, together with his decayed limbs, into the Narbada. During his lifetime he always passed his days in the water in consequence of the heat that had acquired a mastery over his temperament. It is well known that in a state of drunkenness he once threw himself into one of the basins at K&amacr;liy&amacr;daha, which was very deep. Some of the attendants in the harem exerted themselves and caught his hair in their hands and drew him out of the water. After he had come to his senses they told him that this thing had happened. When he had heard that they had pulled him out by the hair of his head, he became exceedingly angry, and ordered the hands of the attendants to be cut off. Another time, when an affair of this kind took place, no one had the boldness to pull him out and he was drowned. By chance, after 110 years had passed since his death, it came to pass that his decayed limbs also became mingled with the water.

<pb id=pb368 n=368><p>On the 28th, as a reward for the buildings of M&amacr;nd&umacr; having been completed through his excellent exertions, I promoted &ayin;Abdu-l-Kar&imacr;m to the rank of 800 personal and 400 horse, and dignified him with the title of Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n (the architect-&Khbarb;&amacr;n). On the same day that the royal standards entered the fort of M&amacr;nd&umacr;, my son of lofty fortune, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram, with the victorious army, entered the city of Burhanpur, which is the seat of the governor of the province of Khandesh.

<p>After some days, representations came from Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n and the R&amacr;y R&amacr;y&amacr;n, to whom at the time of leaving Ajmir my son had given leave to accompany the ambassador to &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, reporting that when the news of our coming reached &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n he came out for 7 kos to meet the order and the litter of the prince, and performed the duties of salutation and respect which are customary at Court. He did not omit a hair&apos;s point of such ceremonies. At the same interview he professed the greatest loyalty, and promised that he would restore all those provinces that &ayin;Ambar of dark fate had taken from the victorious State, and agreed to send to the Court with all reverence a fitting offering with his ambassadors. After saying this he brought the ambassadors in all dignity to the place that had been prepared for them. On the same day he sent some one to &ayin;Ambar with a message of the matters it was necessary to acquaint him with. I heard this news from the reports of Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n and the R&amacr;y R&amacr;y&amacr;n.

<p>From Ajmir up to Monday, the 23rd of the aforesaid<note n=1>Monday, the 23rd Isfand&amacr;rmu&zbarb;, the day on which he reached M&amacr;nd&umacr;. It was about the 6th March, 1617.</note> month, during four months, 2 tigers, 27 blue bulls, 6 <hi>ch&imacr;tal</hi> (spotted deer), 60 deer, 23 hares and foxes, and 1,200 water-fowl and other animals had been killed. On these nights I told the story of my former hunting expeditions and the liking I had for this occupation to <pb id=pb369 n=369>those standing at the foot of the throne of the Caliphate. It occurred to me that I might make up the account of my game from the commencement of my years of discretion up to the present time. I accordingly gave orders to the news-writers, the hunt-accountants and huntsmen, and others employed in this service to make enquiries and tell me of all the animals that had been killed in hunting. It was shown that from the commencement of my 12th year, which was in 988 (1580), up to the end of this year, which is the 11th year after my accession and my 50th lunar year, 28,532 head of game had been taken in my presence. Of these, 17,167 animals I killed myself with my gun or otherwise, viz.: Quadrupeds, 3,203; viz., tigers, 86; bears, cheetahs, foxes, otters (<hi>&umacr;dbil&amacr;o</hi>), and hyænas, 9; blue bulls, 889; <hi>mh&amacr;ka</hi>, a species of antelope, in size equal to a blue bull, 35 head; of antelope, male and female, <hi>chik&amacr;ra</hi>, <hi>ch&imacr;tal</hi>, mountain goats, etc., 1,670<note n=1>The MSS. have 1,672.</note>; rams (<hi>q&umacr;j</hi>) and red deer, 215; wolves, 64; wild buffaloes, 36; pigs, 90; <hi>rang</hi>, 26; mountain sheep, 22; <hi>ar&ghbarb;al&imacr;</hi>, 32; wild asses, 6; hares, 23. Birds, 13,964; viz., pigeons, 10,348; <hi>laga&rdotb;jhaga&rdotb;</hi> (a species of hawk), 3; eagles, 2; <hi>qal&imacr;w&amacr;j</hi> (<hi>&ghbarb;al&imacr;w&amacr;j</hi>, kite), 23; owls (<hi>chu&ghbarb;d</hi>), 39; <hi>qaut&amacr;n</hi> (goldfinch?), 12; kites (<hi>m&umacr;&shbarb;-khwur</hi>, mice-eaters), 5; sparrows, 41; doves, 25; owls (<hi>b&umacr;m</hi>), 30; ducks, geese, cranes, etc., 150; crows, 3,276. Aquatic animals, 10 <hi>magar machha</hi>, that is, crocodiles<note n=2>See Elliot, vi, 351 and 362, note. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r only gives details of the 17,167 animals killed by himself. The <hi>mh&amacr;ka</hi> is possibly a clerical error for <hi>m&amacr;r-&khbarb;wur</hi>. The text says it is allied to the <hi>gawazn</hi>, but the MSS. have <hi>g&umacr;r</hi>, a wild ass. The details of the quadrupeds come to 3,203, the total stated by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r. The details of the birds come to 13,954, but the 10 crocodiles bring up the figures to 13,964, and the total 3,203 + 13,964 comes to the 17,167 mentioned. It has been suggested to me that the <hi>mh&amacr;ka</hi> of the text is the <hi>mah&amacr;</hi> or swamp-deer of the Terai, <hi>Rucervus Duvaucelli</hi>.</note> (<hi>nahang</hi>).




<pb id=pb370 n=370>
<div1 id=yr12>
<head>The Twelfth New Year&apos;s Feast after my auspicious accession.</head>


<p>One ghari of day remained of Monday, the 30th of the aforesaid (Isfand&imacr;y&amacr;r) month, corresponding to the 12th Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal, 1026 (20th March, 1617), when the sun changed from the constellation of Pisces into the pleasure-house of Aries, which is his abode of honour and good fortune. At the very time of transit, which was a fortunate hour, I sat upon the throne. I had ordered that according to the usual custom they should decorate the public audience hall with fine cloths, etc. Notwithstanding that many of the Amirs and chief men of the State were in attendance on my son &Khbarb;urram, a meeting was arranged which was not inferior to those of previous years. I presented the offerings of Tuesday<note n=1>The MSS. have Saturday instead of Tuesday, and this seems reasonable, for there were no offerings on Tuesday (see <hi>infra</hi>).</note> to &Amacr;nand &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the same day, which was the 1st Farward&imacr;n of the 12th year (21st or 22nd March, 1617) a representation arrived from &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Khbarb;urram to the effect that the New Year&apos;s festival had been arranged for in the same manner as in previous years, but as the days of travelling and service had occurred the annual offerings of the servants would be remitted. This proceeding of my son was much approved. Remembering my dear son in my prayers, I besought for him from the throne of Allah his welfare in both worlds, and ordered that on this New Year&apos;s Day no one should present offerings.

<p>In consequence of the disturbance that tobacco brings about in most temperaments and constitutions, I had ordered that no one should smoke it (lit. draw). My brother &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s had also become aware of the mischief arising from it, and had ordered that in Iran no one should venture to smoke. As &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam <pb id=pb371 n=371>(ambassador to Persia) was without control in continual smoking of tobacco, he frequently practised it. Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr; Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n, ambassador of the ruler of Iran, represented to &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s that &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam could never be a moment without tobacco, and he (&Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s) wrote this couplet in answer&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;The friend&apos;s envoy wishes to exhibit tobacco;
    <l>With fidelity&apos;s lamp I light up the tobacco-market.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>&Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam in answer wrote and sent this verse&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;I, poor wretch, was miserable at the tobacco notice;
    <l>By the just Shah&apos;s favour the tobacco-market became brisk.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>On the 3rd of the same month, &Hdotb;usain Beg, the diwan of Bengal, had the good fortune to kiss the threshold, and made an offering of twelve elephants, male and female. &Tumlb;&amacr;hir, bakhshi of Bengal, who had been accused of several offences, obtained the favour of paying his respects to me, and presented before me an offering of twenty-one elephants. Twelve of these were approved and the remainder I conferred on him. On this day a wine-feast was arranged, and I gave wine to most of the servants who were engaged in waiting on me, and made them all heated with the wine of loyalty. On the 4th the huntsmen sent news that they had marked down a lion in the neighbourhood of the Shakkar<note n=1>Text, Sakar. Now locally called the S&amacr;gan, &lsquo;sea,&rsquo; tank.</note> tank, which is inside the fort and one of the famous constructions of the rulers of Malwa. I at once mounted and went towards that game. When the lion appeared he charged the ahadis and the retinue and wounded ten<note n=2>The MSS. only speak of twelve.</note> or twelve of them. At last I finished his business with three shots<note n=3>The MSS. seem to have merely <hi>ba t&imacr;r-i-banduq</hi>, &lsquo;with bullets.&rsquo;</note> (lit. arrows) from my gun, and removed his evil from the servants of God. On the 8th the mansab of M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n, which was 1,000 personal and 400 horse, was <pb id=pb372 n=372>fixed at 1,500 personal and 500 horse. On the 9th, at the request of my son &Khbarb;urram, I increased the mansab of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n by 1,000 personal and horse, making it thus 6,000 personal and horse; that of Ya&ayin;q&umacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, which was 1,500 personal with 1,000 horse, was made 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse; that of Bahl&umacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n Miy&amacr;na<note n=1>Biy&amacr;na in text.</note> was increased by 500 personal and 300 horse to 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse; and that of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;arafu-d-d&imacr;n K&amacr;&shbarb;&ghbarb;ar&imacr;, by whom and his son great bravery had been shown in the Deccan, was increased to 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse. On the 10th Farward&imacr;n, corresponding with the 22nd Rab&imacr;&ayin;u-l-awwal, 1026, my lunar weighing took place. On this day two &ayin;Iraq horses from my private stable and a dress of honour were conferred on my son &Khbarb;urram and sent to him by Bahr&amacr;m Beg. I increased the mansab of I&ayin;tib&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n to 5,000 personal and 3,000 horse. On the 11th, &Hdotb;usain Beg, of Tabriz, whom the ruler of Iran had sent to the ruler of Golconda by way of embassy, as, in consequence of the quarrel of the Franks with the Persians, the road of the M&imacr;r had been closed,<note n=2>That is, apparently, the journey back by sea from the Deccan. The MSS. have &Hdotb;asan instead of &Hdotb;usain, and say the route by Ormuz was closed. Perhaps the <hi>ba M&imacr;r</hi> of text is a mistake for <hi>bar ba&hdotb;r</hi>, &lsquo;by sea.&rsquo;</note> waited upon me with the ambassador of the ruler of Golconda. Offerings came from him of two horses and some <hi>tuq&umacr;z</hi><note n=3><hi>Tuq&umacr;z</hi> means nine in Turk&imacr;.</note> (nine-pieces?) of cloth from the Deccan and Gujarat. On the same day an &ayin;Iraq horse from my private stable was bestowed on &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n. On the 15th, 1,000 personal were added to the mansab of M&imacr;rz&amacr; R&amacr;ja Bh&amacr;o Singh, raising it to 5,000 personal and 3,000 horse. On the 17th, 500 horse were added to the mansab of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam, and I made it up to 5,000 personal and 1,000 horse; that of S&amacr;diq &Khbarb;&amacr;n was fixed at 1,500 personal and 700 horse, original and increase; Ir&amacr;dat &Khbarb;&amacr;n in the same manner was raised to the mansab of 1,500 and <pb id=pb373 n=373>600 horse. To the mansab of An&imacr;r&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; 500 personal and 100 horse were added, and it was made one of 1,500 personal and 500 horse. Three gharis of Saturday, the 19th, remained when the beginning of the <hi>&shbarb;araf</hi> (day of sun&apos;s culmination) occurred, and at the same time I again took my seat on the throne. Of the thirty-two prisoners from the army of the rebel &ayin;Ambar who had been captured by the servants of the victorious State in the battle won by &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n and the defeat of that disastrous man (&ayin;Ambar), I had handed one man over to I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n. The guards who had been appointed to keep him showed carelessness and let him escape. I was much annoyed at this, and I forbade I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n to come to wait on me for three months. As the said prisoner&apos;s name and condition were unknown, he was not caught again, although they showed activity in the matter. At last I ordered the captain of the guards who had been careless in keeping him to be capitally punished. I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n on this day, at the request of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah, had the good fortune to pay his respects to me.

<p>As for a long time no good had been heard of the affairs of Bengal and of the conduct of Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, it entered my mind to send to the Subah of Bengal Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n Fat&hdotb;-jang, who had carried on successfully the affairs of the Subah of Behar and had brought a diamond mine into the possession of the State, and to despatch Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had a jagir in the Subah of Allahabad, in his place to Behar. I sent for Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n to Court. At the same hour on the auspicious day (the day of culmination) an order was given that they should write royal farmans to the effect that <hi>saz&amacr;wal&amacr;n</hi> (revenue collectors) should be appointed to take Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n to Behar and to send Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n Fat&hdotb;-jang to Bengal. Patronizing Sikandar,<note n=1>The I.O. MSS. seem to have Sakakdar or Sakakandar.</note> the <pb id=pb374 n=374>jeweller, I promoted him to the mansab of 1,000 personal and 300 horse.

<p>On the 21st I gave leave to Mu&hdotb;ammad Ri&zdotb;&amacr;, ambassador of the ruler of Iran, and bestowed on him 60,000 darbs, equal to 30,000 rupees, with a dress of honour. As an equivalent to the souvenir (<hi>y&amacr;d-b&umacr;d&imacr;</hi>) that my brother &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s had sent to me, I forwarded with the aforesaid ambassador certain presents of jewelled things which the rulers of the Deccan had sent, with cloths and rare things of every kind fit for presentation, of the value of 100,000 rupees. Among these was a crystal cup that Cheleb&imacr;<note n=1>It appears from &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s&apos;s letter to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r (T&umacr;zuk, p. 165) that Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain Cheleb&imacr; had been employed by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r to collect curios in Persia.</note> had sent from &ayin;Iraq. The Shah had seen this cup and said to the ambassador that if his brother (Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r) would drink wine out of it and send it to him it would be a great mark of affection. When the ambassador represented this, having drunk wine several times out of the cup in his presence, I ordered them to make a lid and a saucer for it and sent it along with the presents. The lid was of enamel (<hi>m&imacr;n&amacr;-k&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>). I ordered the Munshis of mercurial writing (<hi>&ayin;U&tumlb;&amacr;rid-raqm</hi>) to write in due form an answer to the letter he had brought.

<p>On the 22nd the scouts brought in news of a tiger. Mounting immediately, I went against the tiger and with three shots I delivered the people from his wickedness, and himself from the wickedness of his vile nature. Mas&imacr;&hdotb;u-z-zam&amacr;n produced before me a cat, and represented that it was a hermaphrodite, and that in his house it had young ones, and that when it had connection with another cat, young were born to the latter.

<p>On the 25th the contingent of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah passed before me in review on the plain under the jharoka. There were 2,000 cavalry well horsed, most of whom <pb id=pb375 n=375>were Moghuls, 500 foot armed with bows and guns, and fourteen elephants. The bakhshis reckoned them up and reported that this force was fully equipped and according to rule. On the 26th a tigress was killed. On Thursday, the 1st Urd&imacr;bihi&shbarb;t, a diamond that Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n had sent by runners was laid before me; it weighed 23 <hi>surkh</hi>, and the jewellers valued it at 30,000 rupees. It was a diamond of the first water, and was much approved. I ordered them to make a ring of it. On the 3rd the mansab of Y&umacr;suf &Khbarb;&amacr;n was, at the request of B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram, fixed at 1,000 with 1,500 horse and in the same way the mansabs of several of the Amirs and mansabdars were increased at his suggestion. On the 7th, as the huntsmen had marked down four tigers, when two watches and three gharis had passed I went out to hunt them with my ladies. When the tigers came in sight N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n Begam submitted that if I would order her she herself would kill the tigers with her gun. I said, &ldquo;Let it be so.&rdquo; She shot two tigers with one shot each and knocked over the two others with four shots. In the twinkling of an eye she deprived of life the bodies of these four tigers. Until now such shooting was never seen, that from the top of an elephant and inside of a howdah (<hi>&ayin;am&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>) six shots should be made and not one miss, so that the four beasts found no opportunity to spring or move.<note n=1><p>Note by Sayyid A&hdotb;mad. They say that a poet recited this impromptu couplet&mdash;

<q><text><body><lg>
<l>&ldquo;Though N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n be in form a woman,
<l>In the ranks of men she&apos;s a tiger-slayer.&rdquo;
</lg></body></text></q>

<p>The point of this couplet is that before N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n entered Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s harem she was the wife of &Shbarb;&imacr;r-afgan, the tiger-slayer. The line may also read &ldquo;In battle she is a man-smiter and a tiger-slayer.&rdquo;</note> As a reward for this good shooting I gave her a pair of bracelets<note n=2>The two I.O. MSS. have &ldquo;a pair of pearls and a diamond.&rdquo;</note> (<hi>pahunch&imacr;</hi>) of diamonds worth 100,000 rupees and scattered 1,000 ashrafis (over her). On the same day Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n (the architect-&Khbarb;&amacr;n) <pb id=pb376 n=376>obtained leave to go to Lahore to complete the buildings of the palace there. On the 10th the death of Sayyid W&amacr;ri&sumlb;, who was faujd&amacr;r of the Subah of Oudh, was reported. On the 12th, as M&imacr;r Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d asked for a faujd&amacr;rship, I dignified him with the title of Tahawwur &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and, increasing his mansab, appointed him to the faujd&amacr;rship of some of the parganahs of the Subah of Multan. On the 22nd, &Tumlb;&amacr;hir, the bakhshi of Bengal, who had been forbidden to pay his respects, waited upon me and presented his offerings. Eight elephants were also presented as the offering of Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Bengal, and two as that of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Modh&umacr;. On the 28th, at the request of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n, an order was given for the increase of the mansab of &ayin;Abdu-l-&ayin;Az&imacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n by 500. On the 5th &Khbarb;urd&amacr;d the duty of the Diwanship of Gujarat was given to M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Hdotb;usain in supercession of Ke&shbarb;o. I dignified him with the title of Kif&amacr;yat &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On the 8th, La&shbarb;kar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been appointed bakhshi of Bangash, came and waited on me; he offered 100 muhrs and 500 rupees. Some days before this &Umacr;st&amacr;d Mu&hdotb;ammad N&amacr;y&imacr; (flute-player), who was unequalled in his craft, was sent by my son &Khbarb;urram at my summons. I had heard some of his musical pieces<note n=1>There is a fuller account of this flute-player in Price&apos;s Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, p. 114. The melody which he composed in Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s name is there called by Price Saut Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;. (The text does not give the name Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;.) It is there stated that &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n brought the flute-player with him from Burhanpur and introduced him.</note> (<hi>majlis-s&amacr;z</hi>), and he played a tune which he had composed for an ode (<hi>&ghbarb;azal</hi>) in my name. On the 12th I ordered him to be weighed against rupees; this came to 6,300 rupees. I also gave him an elephant with a howdah,<note n=2><hi>Hauza-d&amacr;ri</hi>, &lsquo;with a basin-shaped litter on it.&rsquo;</note> and I ordered him to ride on it and, having packed<note n=3>The word <hi>p&amacr;&shbarb;&imacr;da</hi>, &lsquo;scattered,&rsquo; does not occur in the I.O. MSS. But perhaps the word has two opposite meanings.</note> his rupees about him, to proceed to his lodging. Mull&amacr; Asad, the story-teller, <pb id=pb377 n=377>one of the servants of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;, came on the same day from Tattah and waited on me. As he was a reciter and story-teller full of sweetness and smartness, I liked his society, and I made him happy with the title of Ma&hdotb;&zumlb;&umacr;&zumlb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and gave him 1,000 rupees, a dress of honour, a horse, an elephant, and a palanquin. After some days I ordered him to be weighed against rupees, and his weight came up to 4,400. He was raised to the mansab of 200 personal and 20 horse. I ordered him always to be present at the meetings for talk (<hi>gap</hi>). On the same day La&shbarb;kar &Khbarb;&amacr;n brought his men to the <hi>dar&shbarb;an jharoka</hi> before me. There were 500 horse, 14 elephants, and 100 musketeers. On the 24th news came that Mah&amacr; Singh, grandson of R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n Singh, who was entered among the great officers, had died from excessive wine-drinking at B&amacr;l&amacr;p&umacr;r in the province of Berar. His father also had died at the age of 32<note n=1>Father and son both died apparently at the same age.</note> from the drinking of wine beyond measure. On the same day they had brought to my private fruit-house many mangoes from all parts of the province of the Deccan, Burhanpur, Gujarat, and the parganahs of Malwa. Although this province is well known and celebrated for the sweetness, freedom from stringiness, and size of its mangoes, and there are few mangoes that equal its mangoes&mdash;so much so that I often ordered them to be weighed in my presence, when they were shown to come to a seer or 1&frac14; seer or even more&mdash;yet in sweetness of water and delicious flavour and digestibility the mangoes of Chapr&amacr;mau,<note n=2>It was in Sarkar Qanauj (Jarrett, ii, 185). It is Chibr&amacr;mau of I.G., iii, 97, and is in Farrukhabad district.</note> in the province of Agra, are superior to all the mangoes of this province and of all other places in India.

<p>On the 28th I sent for my son B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram a special gold-embroidered <hi>n&amacr;dir&imacr;</hi> of a fineness such as had never <pb id=pb378 n=378>been produced before in my establishment; I ordered the bearer to tell him that as this rarity had the speciality that I had worn it on the day I quitted Ajmir for the conquest of the Deccan, I had sent it to him. On the same day I placed the turban from my own head, just as it was, on the head of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah, and honoured him with this favour. Three emeralds, a piece of jewelled <hi>&umacr;rbas&imacr;</hi>,<note n=1><hi>Urvasi</hi> is the name of an Apsara or celestial nymph. Probably it is here the name of a dress. (In Forbes&apos;s Hindustani Dictionary <hi>&umacr;rbas&imacr;</hi> is said to denote a particular kind of ornament worn on the breast.)</note> and a ruby signet ring that Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n had sent by way of offering were laid before me. They came to 7,000 rupees in value. On this day, by the mercy and favour of Allah, continued rain fell. Water in M&amacr;nd&umacr; had become very scarce and the people were agitated about the matter so that most of the servants had been ordered to go to the bank of the Narbada. There was no expectation of rain at that season. In consequence of the agitation of the people I turned by way of supplication to the throne of God, and He in His mercy and grace gave such rain that in the course of a day and a night tanks, ponds (<hi>birkah&amacr;</hi>), and rivers became full, and the agitation of the people was changed to complete ease. With what tongue can I render thanks for this favour? On the 1st of T&imacr;r a standard was presented to Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n. The offering of the R&amacr;n&amacr;, consisting of two horses, a piece of Gujarati cloth, and some jars of pickles and preserves, was laid before me. On the 3rd, Mu&ayin;azz&amacr;<note n=2>The MSS. have <hi>ma&ghbarb;ra</hi>, which may be connected with the Arabic <hi>ma&ghbarb;r</hi>, &lsquo;travelling quickly.&rsquo; It may be the name of a courier, or merely mean &lsquo;quickly.&rsquo;</note>(?) brought news of the capture of &ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f, a descendant of the rulers of Gujarat, who had always been the originator of mischief and disturbance in that Subah. As his capture was a reason for the contentment of the people, praise was given to God, and I ordered Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n to send him to Court <pb id=pb379 n=379>by one of his mansabdars. Many of the zamindars in the neighbourhood of M&amacr;nd&umacr;, came and waited on me, and laid offerings before me. On the 8th, R&amacr;m D&amacr;s, son of R&amacr;ja R&amacr;j Singh Kachhw&amacr;ha, was given the <hi>&tdotb;&imacr;ka</hi> of a Raja, and I honoured him with that title. Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r Beg, who was known in M&amacr;war&amacr;&hamza;a-n-nahr (Transoxiana) as Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r Q&umacr;rch&imacr;, and had not been without connection and influence with the ruler of that country, came and waited on me. Of all his offerings a white china cup on a stand was the most approved. The offering of Bah&amacr;dur &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Qandahar, consisting of nine horses, nine <hi>tuq&umacr;z</hi> of fine cloth (81 pieces?), two black foxes&apos; skins, and other things, was brought before me. Also on this day the R&amacr;ja of Gadeha, Pem<note n=1>Apparently it should be Bh&imacr;m; see <hi>infra</hi>. Gadeha is probably Gadh&imacr; in Khandesh; see Lethbridge&apos;s &ldquo;Golden Book of India,&rdquo; p. 138. It is the Garv&imacr; of I.G., v, 33, and is one of the Bh&imacr;l States in the D&amacr;ng Tract.</note> Nar&amacr;yan, had the good fortune to wait on me, and made an offering of seven elephants, male and female. On the 10th a horse and dress of honour were given to Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r Q&umacr;rch&imacr;. On the 13th was the feast of rose-water scattering (<hi>gul&amacr;b-p&amacr;&shbarb;&amacr;n</hi>). The rites due to that day were performed. &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Maud&umacr;d Chi&shbarb;t&imacr;, one of the officers of Bengal, was honoured with the title of Chi&shbarb;t&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and I presented him with a horse. On the 14th, R&amacr;wal Samars&imacr; (Samarsi&mdotb;ha), son of R&amacr;wal &Umacr;day Singh, zamindar of B&amacr;nsw&amacr;la, waited on me; he gave as offering 30,000 rupees, three elephants, a jewelled <hi>p&amacr;n-d&amacr;n</hi> (box for betel), and a jewelled belt. On the 15th nine diamonds which Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n Fat&hdotb;-jang, the governor of Behar, had sent along with Muhammad Beg from the mine, and from the collections of the zamindars of that place, were laid before me. Of these, one weighed 14&frac12; tanks, and was of the value of 100,000 rupees. On the same day Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r Q&umacr;rch&imacr; was presented with 14,000 darbs, <pb id=pb380 n=380>and I promoted him to the mansab of 500 personal and 300 horse. I fixed the mansab of T&amacr;t&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <hi>bak&amacr;wul-beg&imacr;</hi> (chief steward), original and increase, at 2,000 personal and 300 horse, and each of his sons was separately promoted to an increased mansab. At the request of Prince Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Parw&imacr;z, I increased the personal mansab of Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n by 500.

<p>On the 29th, which was the auspicious day of Thursday, Sayyid &ayin;Abdu-llah B&amacr;rha, the envoy of my son of good fortune, B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram, waited on me, and presented a letter from that son containing news of a victory over the provinces of the Deccan. All the chiefs, laying the head of duty in the noose of obedience, had consented to service and humility, and laid before him the keys of forts and strongholds, especially the fort of Ahmadnagar. In gratitude for this great favour and beneficence, placing the head of supplication on the throne of that God who requires no return, I opened my lips in thankfulness, and, humbling myself, ordered them to beat the drums of rejoicing. Thanks be to Allah that a territory that had passed out of hand has come back into the possession of the servants of the victorious State, and that the seditious, who had been breathing the breath of rebellion and boasting, have turned towards supplication and weakness, and become deliverers of properties and payers of tribute. As this news reached me through N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n Begam, I gave her the parganah of Boda (&Tdotb;o&ddotb;&amacr;?),<note n=1>There was a Bodah in Sark&amacr;r Marosor in Malwa, but its revenue was only 2&frac12; lakhs of dams (Jarrett, ii, 208). The two I.O. MSS. and Debi Prasad&apos;s Hindi version have &Tdotb;o&ddotb;&amacr;. &Tdotb;o&ddotb;&amacr; was in Ajmir, Ran&tdotb;ambhor Sarkar, and its revenue in Akbar&apos;s time was 1&frac12; lakhs of rupees (Jarrett, ii, 275).</note> the revenue of which is 200,000 rupees. Please God, when the victorious forces enter the province of the Deccan and its forts, and the mind of my excellent son &Khbarb;urram is satisfied with regard to their possession, he will bring with the ambassadors such an offering from <pb id=pb381 n=381>the Deccan as no other king of this age has received. It was ordered that he should bring with him the Amirs who were to receive jagirs in this Subah, in order that they might have the honour of waiting on me. They will thereafter get leave to depart, and the glorious royal standards will return with victory and rejoicing to the capital of Agra. Some days before the news of this victory reached me, I took one night an augury from the diwan of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb; as to what would be the end of this affair, and this ode turned up&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;The day of absence and night of parting from the friend are o&apos;er.
    <l>I took this augury; the star passed and fulfilment came.&rdquo;<note n=1>Ode 192 of Brockhaus&apos; edition, p. 112, first couplet.</note>
</lg>


<p>When the secret tongue (<hi>lis&amacr;nu-l-&ghbarb;aib</hi>) of &Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb; showed such an ending it gave me a strong hope, and accordingly, after twenty-five days, the news of victory arrived. In many of my desires I have resorted to the &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja&apos;s diwan, and (generally) the result has coincided with what I found there. It is seldom that the opposite has happened.

<p>On the same day I added 1,000 horse to the mansab of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and raised it to that of 5,000 personal and horse. At the end of the day I went with the ladies to look round the building of the Haft Man&zumlb;ar<note n=2>This is the building described by William Finch. See the Journal of John Jourdain, ed. by Foster for the Hakluyt Society, App. D. Finch speaks of a high turret 170 steps high. The tower was the Tower of Victory erected by Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d I in 1443 to commemorate a victory over the Raja of Chitor. &ldquo;The stump of it has been found.&rdquo; Jourdain speaks of six storeys. It was built of green stone like marble.</note> (seven storeys), and at the beginning of the evening returned to the palace. This building was founded by a former ruler of Malwa, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d &Khbarb;alj&imacr;. It has seven storeys, and in each storey there are four chambers (<hi>&sdotb;uffa</hi>) containing four windows. The height of this tower (<hi>m&imacr;n&amacr;r</hi>) is 54&frac12; cubits, and its circumference 50 yards (<hi>gaz</hi>). There are 171 steps from the ground <pb id=pb382 n=382>to the seventh storey. In going and returning I scattered 1,400 rupees.<note n=1>Two hundred rupees per storey(?).</note>

<p>On the 31st I honoured Sayyid &ayin;Abdu-llah with the title of Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and having exalted him with a dress of honour, a horse, an elephant, and a jewelled dagger, gave him leave and sent him to do duty with my son of lofty fortune. I also sent by him a ruby of the value of more than 30,000 rupees for my son. I did not regard its value, but as for a long time I used to bind it on my own head, I sent it him by way of good augury, considering it lucky for him. I appointed Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d, a son-in-law of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan bakhshi, to be bakhshi and news-writer of the Subah of Behar, and when he took leave I gave him an elephant. At the end of the day of Thursday, 5th Amurd&amacr;d, I went with the ladies to see the N&imacr;l-kun&ddotb;, which is one of the most<note n=2>Blochmann, p. 371, and Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, ii, 537. Now locally called the N&imacr;l-kan&tdotb;h, &lsquo;blue neck.&rsquo;</note> pleasant places in the fort of Mandu (M&amacr;n&ddotb;oga&rdotb;h). &Shbarb;&amacr;h-bud&amacr;&ghbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was one of my revered father&apos;s most considerable Amirs, at the time when he held this province in jagir, built in this place an exceedingly pleasing and enjoyable building. Delaying there till two or three gharis of night had passed I returned to the auspicious palace.

<p>As several indiscretions on the part of Mu&khbarb;li&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n diwan and bakhshi of the Subah of Bengal, had come to my ears, I reduced his mansab by 1,000 personal and 200 horse. On the 7th a war (<hi>mast&imacr;</hi>) elephant from among those sent as offerings by &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, by name Gaj-r&amacr;j, was sent to R&amacr;n&amacr; Amr Singh. On the 11th, I went out to hunt and came one stage from the fort. There was excessive rain, and the mud was such that there was hardly any moving. For the convenience of the people and the comfort of the animals I gave up <pb id=pb383 n=383>this undertaking, and passing the day of Thursday outside, returned on Friday eve. On the same day Hid&amacr;yatu-llah, who is very well suited to carry out the rules and movements (in travelling) of the headquarters (lit. presence), was honoured with the title of Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n. In this rainy season rain fell in such quantities that old men said that they did not remember such rain in any age. For nearly forty days there was nothing but cloud and rain, so that the sun only appeared occasionally. There was so much wind that many buildings, both old and new, fell down. On the first night there was<note n=1>The text misses out a conjunction before <hi>&sdotb;ad&amacr;</hi>.</note> such rain and thunder and lightning as has seldom been heard of. Nearly twenty women and men were killed, and the foundations even of some of the stone buildings were broken up. No noise is more terrifying than this. Till the middle of the month was passed, wind and rain increased. After this they gradually became less. What can be written of the verdure and self-grown fragrant plants? They covered valley and plain and hill and desert. It is not known if in the inhabited world there exists another such place as Mandu for sweetness of air and for the pleasantness of the locality and the neighbourhood, especially in the rainy season. In this season, which lasts for months and extends up to the hot weather, one cannot sleep inside houses without coverlets, and in the day the temperature is such that there is no need for a fan or for change of place. All that could be written would still fall short of the many beauties of the place. I saw two things that I had not seen in any other place in Hindustan. One was the tree of the wild plantain that grows in most of the uncultivated places in the fort, and the other the nest of the wagtail (<hi>mam&umacr;la</hi>), which they call in Persian the <hi>dum-s&imacr;cha</hi> (tail-wagger). Up till now none of the hunters had pointed out its nest. By <pb id=pb384 n=384>chance in the building I occupied there was its nest, and it brought out two young ones.

<p>Three watches of day had passed on Thursday, the 19th, when I mounted with the ladies in order to go round and see the courts and buildings on the Shakkar tank, founded by former rulers of Malwa. As an elephant had not been conferred on I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah on account of his government of the Panjab, I gave him on the road one of my private elephants of the name of Jagjot. I remained in this enchanting place until the evening, and was much delighted with the pleasantness and greenness of the surrounding open spaces. After performing my evening prayer and counting my rosary, we returned to our fixed residence. On Friday an elephant named Ran-b&amacr;dal (cloud of war?), which Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n had sent as an offering, was brought before me. Having adopted for myself certain special cloths and cloth-stuffs, I gave an order that no one should wear the same but he on whom I might bestow them. One was a <hi>n&amacr;dir&imacr;</hi> coat that they wear over the <hi>qab&amacr;</hi> (a kind of outer vest). Its length is from the waist down to below the thighs, and it has no sleeves. It is fastened in front with buttons, and the people of Persia call it <hi>kurd&imacr;</hi> (from the country of the Kurds). I gave it the name of nadiri. Another garment is a &Tumlb;&umacr;s shawl, which my revered father had adopted as a dress. The next was a coat (qaba) with a folded collar (<hi>bat&umacr; gir&imacr;b&amacr;n</hi>). The ends of the sleeves were embroidered. He had also appropriated this to himself. Another was a qaba with a border, from which the fringes of cloth were cut off and sewn round the skirt and collar and the ends of the sleeve. Another was a qaba of Gujarati satin, and another a <hi>ch&imacr;ra</hi> and waistbelt woven with silk, in which were interwoven gold and silver threads.

<p>As the monthly pay of some of Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s horsemen, according to the regulation of three and two <pb id=pb385 n=385>horsed men, for the performance of duty in the Deccan, had become increased and the service<note n=1>Apparently the meaning is that the standard of two and three horses had not been kept up.</note> had not been performed, I gave an order that the civil officers (<hi>d&imacr;w&amacr;niy&amacr;n</hi>) should levy the difference from his jagir. In the end of Thursday, the 26th, corresponding with the 14th &Shbarb;a&ayin;b&amacr;n, which is the &Shbarb;ab-i-bar&amacr;t, I held a meeting in one of the houses of the palace of N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n Begam, which was situated in the midst of large tanks, and summoning the Amirs and courtiers to the feast which had been prepared by the Begam, I ordered them to give the people cups and all kinds of intoxicating drinks according to the desire of each. Many asked for cups, and I ordered that whoever drank a cup should sit according to his mansab and condition. All sorts of roast meats, and fruits by way of relish, were ordered to be placed before everyone. It was a wonderful assembly. In the beginning of the evening they lighted lanterns and lamps all round the tanks and buildings, and a lighting up was carried out the like of which has perhaps never been arranged in any place. The lanterns and lamps cast their reflection on the water, and it appeared as if the whole surface of the tank was a plain of fire. A grand entertainment took place, and the drinkers of cups took more cups than they could carry.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;A feast was arranged that lighted up the heart,
    <l>It was of such beauty as the heart desired.
    <l>They flung over this verdant mead
    <l>A carpet broad as the field of genius.
    <l>From abundance of perfume the feast spread far,
    <l>The heavens were a musk-bag by reason of incense,
    <l>The delicate ones of the garden (the flowers) became glorious,
    <l>The face of each was lighted up like a lamp.&rdquo;<note n=2>Some lines of this agree with the verses in the Akbar-n&amacr;ma, ii, 190. The last two lines are quoted again in the account of the 15th year (p. 299 of Persian text).</note>
</lg>


<pb id=pb386 n=386><p>After three of four gharis of night had passed, I dismissed the men and summoned the ladies, and till a watch of night (remained?) passed the time in this delightful place, and enjoyed myself. On this day of Thursday several special things had happened. One was that it was the day of my ascension of the throne; secondly, it was the &Shbarb;ab-i-bar&amacr;t, thirdly, it was the day of the <hi>r&amacr;kh&imacr;</hi>, which has already been described, and with the Hindus is a special day. On account of these three pieces of good fortune I called the day Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba.

<p>On the 27th, Sayyid K&amacr;s&umacr; was dignified with the title of Parwari&shbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n. Wednesday in the same way that Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba had been a fortunate one for me had fallen out exactly the opposite. On this account I gave this evil day the name of Kam-&shbarb;amba, in order that this day might always fail from the world (lessen). On the next day a jewelled dagger was conferred on Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r Q&umacr;rch&imacr;, and I ordered that after this he should be styled Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r Beg. I had sent for Jay Singh, son of R&amacr;ja Mah&amacr; Singh. On this day he waited on me and presented an elephant as an offering. A watch and three gharis of Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba, the 2nd of &Shbarb;ahriy&amacr;r, had passed, when I rode to look round the N&imacr;l-kund and its neighbourhood; thence I passed on to the plain of the &ayin;&Imacr;d-g&amacr;h on the top of a mound that was very green and pleasant. Champa flowers and other sweet wild herbs of that plain had bloomed to such a degree that on all sides on which the eye fell the world looked like a world of greenery and flowers. I entered the palace when a watch of night had passed.

<p>As it had been several times mentioned to me that a kind of sweetmeat was obtained from the wild plantain such that dervishes and other poor people made it their food, I wished to enquire into the matter. What I found was that the fruit of the wild plantain was an exceedingly hard and tasteless thing. The real fact is that in the <pb id=pb387 n=387>lower part (of the trunk) there is a thing shaped like a fir-cone from which the real fruit of the plantain comes out. On this a kind of sweetmeat forms which has exactly the juiciness and taste of <hi>p&amacr;l&umacr;da</hi>. It appears that men eat this and enjoy it.<note n=1>The account is obscure. Elliot&apos;s translation is &ldquo;In the root of the tree is found a lump of sweet substance which is exactly like that of Faluda. It is eaten by the poor.&rdquo; The text and some MSS. have <hi>yak p&amacr;rcha-i-&shbarb;&imacr;r&imacr;n&imacr;</hi>, but B. M. Or. 3276 has <hi>yak p&amacr;ra</hi>. Roxburgh says nothing about any such growth on the wild plantain. <hi>F&amacr;l&umacr;d&amacr;</hi> or <hi>p&amacr;l&umacr;da</hi> is the name of a sweetmeat.</note>

<p>With regard to carrier pigeons (<hi>kab&umacr;tar-i-n&amacr;ma-bar</hi>), it had been stated to me in the course of conversation that in the time of the Abbaside Caliphs they taught<note n=2>It is curious that the word <hi>am&umacr;&khbarb;ta</hi>, &lsquo;taught,&rsquo; in the text, and which appears to be almost necessary for the sense, does not occur either in the two I. O. MSS. or in the R. A. S. one. Burhanpur is about 100 miles as the crow flies south-south-east of Mandu.</note> the Baghdad pigeons who were styled &lsquo;letter-carriers&rsquo; (<hi>n&amacr;ma-bar</hi>), and were one-half larger<note n=3>The text has <hi>par</hi>, &lsquo;feathers,&rsquo; instead of the sign of the comparative <hi>tar</hi>, but the MSS. have <hi>kal&amacr;ntar</hi>.</note> than the wild pigeon. I bade the pigeon-fanciers to teach their pigeons, and they taught some of them in such a manner that we let them fly from Mandu in the early morning, and if there was much rain they reached Burhanpur by 2&frac12; pahars (watches) of the day, or even in 1&frac12; pahars. If the air was very clear most of them arrived by one pahar of the day and some by four gharis (hours) of the day.

<p>On the 3rd a letter came from B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram, announcing the coming of Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n and R&amacr;y R&amacr;y&amacr;n and the arrival of the ambassadors of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and their bringing suitable offerings of jewels, jewelled things, elephants, and horses, offerings such as had never come in any reign or time, and expressing much gratitude for the services and loyalty of the aforesaid &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and his faithfulness to his word and duty. He asked for a gracious royal firman bestowing on him the title of <hi>farzand</hi> (son) and for other favours, which had never <pb id=pb388 n=388>yet been vouchsafed in his honour. Since it was very gratifying to me to please my son, and his request was reasonable, I ordered that the Munshis of the mercurial pen should write a farman in the name of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, conveying every kind of affection and favour, and exceeding in his praise ten or twelve times what had been previously written. They were ordered in these farmans to address him as farzand. In the body of the farman I wrote this couplet with my own hand&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Thou&apos;st become, at &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Khbarb;urram&apos;s request,
    <l>Renowned in the world as my son&rdquo; (<hi>farzand&imacr;</hi>).
</lg>


<p>On the 4th day this farman was sent off with its copy, so that my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Khbarb;urram might see the copy and send off the original. On Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba, the 9th, I went with the ladies to the house of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n. His house was situated in the valley, and was exceedingly pleasant and bright. It had several valleys round it; in some places there were flowing waterfalls, and mango and other trees exceedingly green and pleasant and shady. Nearly 200 or 300 keora shrubs (<hi>gul-i-keo&rdotb;&amacr;</hi>, <hi>Pandanus odoratissimus</hi>) grew in one valley. In fine that day passed in great enjoyment. A wine party was held and cups were presented to the Amirs and intimates, and an offering from &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n was laid before me. There were many rare things. I took whatever I approved, and the remainder was given to him. On the same day &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja M&imacr;r, son of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, who had come on a summons from Bangash, waited on me, and presented as an offering a ruby, two pearls, and an elephant. R&amacr;ja Bh&imacr;m Nar&amacr;yan, a zamindar of the province of Gadeha, was promoted to the mansab of 1,000 personal and 500 horse. An order was given that a jagir should be provided him out of his native country. On the 12th a letter came from my son &Khbarb;urram that R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Mal, son of R&amacr;ja B&amacr;so, whose territory is near the fort of Kangra, had promised that in the course of a year he would <pb id=pb389 n=389>bring that fort into the possession of the servants of the victorious State. He also sent his letter which covenanted for this. I ordered that after comprehending his desires and wishes, and satisfying himself with regard to them, he should send off the Raja to wait on me, so that he might set about the said duty. On the same day, which was Monday, the 11th, corresponding with the 1st Rama&zdotb;&amacr;n (2nd September, 1617), after four gharis and seven pals had passed, a daughter was born to my son by the mother of his other children, who was the daughter of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n. This child was named R&umacr;&shbarb;an&amacr;r&amacr; Begam. As the Zamindar of Jaitp&umacr;r, which is in the jurisdiction<note n=1>The word is <hi>&hdotb;aw&amacr;l&imacr;</hi>, which is sometimes translated &lsquo;neighbourhood,&rsquo; and has been so translated here by Mr. Rogers. But either Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r has made a mistake or the word <hi>&hdotb;aw&amacr;l&imacr;</hi> is capable of a wide interpretation, for Jaitp&umacr;r appears to be Jaitp&umacr;r in Kathiawar. See Jarrett, ii, 258. and I. G., vii, 192. Possibly Mandu is a mistake for B&amacr;ndh&umacr;. But there is a Jetgarh in Malwa (Jarrett, ii, 200).</note> of Mandu, in consequence of wickedness had not had the felicity of kissing the threshold I ordered Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n to proceed against him with some mansabdars and 400 or 500 musketeers and plunder his country. On the 13th one elephant was given to Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n and one to M&imacr;r Q&amacr;sim, son of Sayyid Mur&amacr;d. On the 16th Jay Singh, son of R&amacr;ja Mah&amacr; Singh, who was 12 years old, was promoted to the mansab of 1,000 personal and horse. To M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n, son of M&imacr;r &Khbarb;al&imacr;lu-llah, I gave an elephant which I had myself approved, and another to Mull&amacr; &ayin;Abdu-s-Satt&amacr;r.<note n=2>Probably this was the author who collaborated with Jerome Xavier. See Rieu&apos;s Catalogue, iii, 1077.</note> Bhoj, son of R&amacr;ja Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t Bhadauriy&amacr;, after his father&apos;s death, came from the Deccan and waited on me, and presented 100 muhrs as an offering. On the 17th it was represented that R&amacr;ja Kaly&amacr;n had come from the province of Orissa, and proposed to kiss my threshold. As some unpleasant stories had been told with regard to him, an order was given that they should hand him over with his son to <pb id=pb390 n=390>&Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n to enquire into the truth of what had been said about him. On the 19th an elephant was given to Jay Singh. On the 20th 200 horses were added to the mansab of Ke&shbarb;o D&amacr;s M&amacr;r&umacr;, so that it came, original and increase, to 2,000 personal and 1,200 horse. On the 23rd, having distinguished Allah-d&amacr;d, the Afghan, with the title of Ra&shbarb;&imacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, I gave him a <hi>parm-narm</hi> (shawl). The offering of R&amacr;ja Kaly&amacr;n Singh, consisting of eighteen elephants, was brought before me; sixteen elephants were included in my private elephant stud, and I presented him with two. As the news had arrived from Iraq of the death of the mother of M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n, daughter of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Isma&ayin;&imacr;l II, of the race of the &Sdotb;afaw&imacr; kings, I sent him a dress of honour and brought him out of the robes of mourning. On the 25th Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n received a dress of honour, and, in company with his brother R&umacr;hu-llah and other mansabdars, obtained leave to go to punish the Zamindar of Jaitpur. On the 28th, having come down from the fort with the intention of seeing the Narbada and to hunt in its neighbourhood, I took the ladies with me and halted two stages down on the bank of the river. As there were many mosquitoes and fleas, I did not stay more than one night. Having come the next day to T&amacr;r&amacr;p&umacr;r I returned on Friday, the 31st. On the 1st of the month of Mihr, Mu&hdotb;sin &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, who at this time had come from Transoxiana, received a dress of honour and 5,000 rupees. On the 2nd, after enquiry into the matters of R&amacr;ja Kaly&amacr;n, with regard to which a report had been received, and which &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n had been appointed to investigate, as he appeared innocent, he enjoyed the good fortune to kiss the threshold, and presented as an offering 100 muhrs and 1,000 rupees. His offering of a string of pearls, consisting of eighty pearls and two rubies with a bracelet with a ruby and two pearls, and the golden figure of a horse studded with jewels, was laid before <pb id=pb391 n=391>me. A petition from Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n arrived stating that when the victorious army entered the province of Jaitpur the zamindar had elected to run away. He could not oppose Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;, and his country was ravaged. He now repented of what he had done, and intended to come to the Court, which was the asylum of the world, and proffer service and obedience. A force with R&umacr;&hdotb;u-llah was sent in pursuit of him to capture and bring him to Court, or to lay waste and ruin his domain and imprison his women and dependants, who had gone into the country of the neighbouring zamindars. On the 8th &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ni&zumlb;&amacr;m came and laid before me fourteen pomegranates from the port of Mu&khbarb;&amacr; (Mocha), which they had brought to Surat in the space of fourteen days, and in eight days more to Mandu. The size of these was the same as that of the Thatta pomegranates. Though the pomegranates of Thatta are seedless and these have seeds,<note n=1>I. O. MS. 305 has <hi>d&amacr;n&amacr;-&imacr;-n&amacr;zik&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;soft (or small) seeds.&rsquo;</note> yet they are delicate, and in freshness excel those of Thatta. On the 9th news came that while R&umacr;&hdotb;u-llah was passing through the villages, he came to know that the women and dependants of the Jaitp&umacr;r&imacr; zamindar were in a certain village. He remained outside, and sent men into the village to make enquiries and to bring out the persons who were there. Whilst he was making enquiries, one of the devoted servants of the zamindar came along with the villagers. Whilst his men were scattered here and there, and R&umacr;&hdotb;u-llah with some servants had brought out his furniture and was sitting on a carpet, that devoted servant came behind him and struck him with a spear; the blow was fatal and the spearhead came out at his breast. The pulling out of the spear and the reverting<note n=2>Note 181 has <hi>w&amacr;&sdotb;il ga&shbarb;tan</hi>. &lsquo;becoming united&rsquo; (to the Deity).</note> to his original (dying) of R&umacr;&hdotb;u-llah took place together. Those who were present sent that wretch to hell. All the men who had been <pb id=pb392 n=392>scattered about put on their armour and attacked the village. Those doomed men (<hi>&khbarb;&umacr;n-giriftah&amacr;</hi>) had the disgrace of harbouring<note n=1><hi>J&amacr; d&amacr;dan</hi>, &lsquo;to give way,&rsquo; the meaning apparently being that they had protected R&umacr;&hdotb;u-llah&apos;s murderers. But I. O. MS. 305 seems to have <hi>j&amacr;wid&amacr;n</hi>, &lsquo;eternal,&rsquo; which would mean that they were killed and also eternally disgraced as rebels. The Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, iii, 13, has a different account of the manner of R&umacr;&hdotb;u-llah&apos;s death. He was Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;&apos;s elder brother.</note> rebels and sedition-mongers, and were killed in the course of an astronomical hour. They brought into captivity their wives and daughters, and, setting fire to the village, made it so that nothing was seen but heaps of ashes. They then lifted up the body of R&umacr;&hdotb;u-llah and went and joined Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n. With regard to the bravery and zeal of R&umacr;&hdotb;u-llah, there was no dispute; at the most, his carelessness brought about this turn of fortune. No traces of habitation remained in that region; the zamindar of that place went into the hills and jungles and concealed and obliterated himself. He then sent someone to Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n and begged for pardon for his offences. An order was given that he should be allowed quarter and brought to Court.

<p>The mansab of Muruwwat &Khbarb;&amacr;n was fixed, original and increase, at 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse, on condition that he should destroy Harbh&amacr;n,<note n=2>The I. O. MSS. have P&imacr;r Bah&amacr;r and Chandra Kona, which latter may be the place in Midnapur.</note> Zamindar of Chandra-ko&tdotb;a, from whom travellers endured great annoyance. On the 13th R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Mal, together with Taq&imacr;, the bakhshi who was in attendance on B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram, came and waited on me. He represented all his requirements. His engagement to perform the work was approved, and at the request of my son he was honoured with a standard and drums. To Taq&imacr;, who had been appointed with him, a jewelled <hi>khapwa</hi> (dagger) was given, and it was arranged that he should finish his own affairs and start off quickly. The mansab of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &ayin;Al&imacr; Beg M&imacr;rz&amacr;, who had been appointed to the defence and <pb id=pb393 n=393>administration of Ahmadnagar, was fixed at 5,000 personal and horse. An elephant apiece was given to N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Qul&imacr;, &Khbarb;w&amacr;jag&imacr; &Tumlb;&amacr;hir, Sayyid &Khbarb;&amacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad, Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and Wal&imacr; Beg. On the 17th the mansab of &Hdotb;&amacr;kim Beg was fixed, original and increase, at 1,000 personal and 200 horse. On the same day, after presenting R&amacr;ja S&umacr;raj Mal with a dress of honour, an elephant, and a jewelled khapwa, and Taq&imacr; with a dress of honour, I gave them leave to proceed on duty to Kangra. When those who had been sent by my son of lofty fortune, &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Khbarb;urram, with the ambassadors of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n and his offerings, arrived at Burhanpur, and my son&apos;s mind was completely satisfied with regard to the affairs of the Deccan, he prayed for the Subahdarship of Berar, Khandesh, and Ahmadnagar for the Commander-in-Chief, the Khankhanan, and sent his son &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who is really Khankhanan junior, with 12,000 cavalry to hold possession of the conquered provinces. Every place and estate were put as jagirs into the hands of reliable men, and fitting arrangements were made for the government of the province. He left, out of the troops that were with him, 30,000 horse and 7,000 musketeer infantry, and took with him the remainder, amounting to 25,000 horse and 2,000 gunners, and set off to wait on me. On Thursday (Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba), the 20th<note n=1>Text 8th, but should be 20th. See p. 196, where the next Thursday is mentioned as the 27th. See Elliot, vi, 351.</note> of the month of Mihr (Divine month), in the twelfth year from my accession, corresponding with the 11th &Shbarb;aww&amacr;l, 1026 Hijra (12th October, 1617), after three watches and one ghari had passed, he entered the fort of Mandu auspiciously and joyfully, and had the honour of waiting on me. The duration of our separation was 11<note n=2>Text 15 months and 11 days, but it should be 11 months. &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n left his father at Ajmir on the last day of &Shbarb;aww&amacr;l, 1025, and he rejoined him on 11th &Shbarb;aww&amacr;l of the following year.</note> months and 11 days. After he had <pb id=pb394 n=394>performed the dues of salutation and kissing the ground, I called him up into the jharokha, and with exceeding kindness and uncontrolled delight rose from my place and held him in the embrace of affection. In proportion as he strove to be humble and polite, I increased my favours and kindness to him and made him sit near me. He presented 1,000 ashrafis and 1,000 rupees as <hi>nazar</hi> and the same amount by way of alms. As the time did not allow of his presenting all his offerings, he now brought before me the elephant Sarn&amacr;k (?) (snake-head?), that was the chief of the elephants of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s offering, with a casket of precious stones. After this the bakhshis were ordered to arrange according to their mansabs the Amirs who had come with my son to pay their respects. The first who had the honour of audience was &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n. Sending for him above, I selected him for the honour of kissing my feet. He presented 1,000 muhrs and 1,000 rupees as nazr, and a casket filled with jewels and jewelled things as an offering (<hi>p&imacr;&shbarb;-ka&shbarb;</hi>). What was accepted of his offering was worth 45,000 rupees. After this &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n kissed the threshold, and presented 100 muhrs as nazr. Then Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n had the honour of kissing the ground, and presented an offering of 100 muhrs and 1,000 rupees, with a parcel (<hi>ga&tdotb;h&rdotb;&imacr;</hi>)<note n=1>So in text, but I.O. MSS. have <hi>kurs&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;a chair or stool&rsquo; (l. 37).</note> of precious stones and jewelled vessels, the value of which was 124,000 rupees. Of these one ruby weighed 11 miskals; an European brought it last year to sell at Ajmir, and priced it at 200,000 rupees, but the jewellers valued it at 80,000 rupees. Consequently the bargain did not come off, and it was returned to him and he took it away. When he came to Burhanpur, Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n bought it from him for 100,000 rupees. After this R&amacr;ja Bh&amacr;o Singh waited on me, presenting 1,000 rupees as nazr and some jewels and jewelled things as a <hi>p&imacr;&shbarb;-ka&shbarb;</hi>. <pb id=pb395 n=395>In the same manner D&amacr;r&amacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of the Khankhanan, Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, brother of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n the Arab, Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, &Shbarb;&amacr;h-b&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Mu&ayin;tamad &Khbarb;&amacr;n bakhshi, &Umacr;d&amacr; R&amacr;m,<note n=1>Text <hi>b&umacr;dand</hi>, but &Umacr;d&amacr; R&amacr;m is the only Dakhani officer mentioned.</note> who was one of the chief Amirs of Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-l-mulk, and who came on the promise of my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Khbarb;urram and joined the ranks of the loyal, waited on me in the order of their mansabs. After this the Wakils of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n had the honour of kissing the ground, and presented a letter from him. Before this, as a reward for the conquest of the R&amacr;n&amacr;, a mansab of 20,000 personal and 10,000 horse was conferred on my son of lofty fortune. When he had hastened to the capture of the Deccan he had obtained the title of Shah, and now, in reward for this distinguished service, I gave him a mansab of 30,000 personal and 20,000 horse and bestowed on him the title of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n. An order was given that henceforth they should place a chair in the paradise-resembling assemblies near my throne for my son to sit upon. This was a special favour for my son, as it had never been the custom heretofore. A special dress of honour with a gold-embroidered <hi>ch&amacr;rqab</hi>, with collar, the end of the sleeves and the skirt decorated with pearls, worth 50,000 rupees, a jewelled sword with a jewelled <hi>pardala</hi> (belt), and a jewelled dagger were bestowed upon him. In his honour I myself came down from the jharokha and poured over his head a small tray of jewels and a tray of gold (coins).<note n=2>The MSS. have <hi>zar-baft</hi>, &lsquo;gold brocade.&rsquo;</note> Having called Sarn&amacr;k elephant to me, I saw without doubt that what had been heard in its praise and of its beauty was real. It stood all the tests in size, form, and beauty. Few elephants are to be seen of such beauty. As it appeared acceptable to me, I myself mounted (i.e. drove it) and took it into my private palace, and scattered a quantity of gold coins on its head, <pb id=pb396 n=396>and ordered them to tie it up inside the royal palace. With regard to this I gave it the name of N&umacr;r-ba&khbarb;t<note n=1>In reference to his own name of N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n.</note> (light of fortune). On Friday, the 24th, R&amacr;ja Bharj&imacr;v, Zamindar of Bagl&amacr;&ndotb;a, came and waited on me. His name is Part&amacr;p; every Raja there has been of that place they call Bharj&imacr;v. He has about 1,500 horse in his pay (<hi>maw&amacr;jib-&khbarb;w&amacr;r</hi>), and in time of need he can bring into the field 3,000 horse. The province of Bagl&amacr;&ndotb;a lies between Gujarat, Khandesh, and the Deccan. It has two strong forts, S&amacr;ler and M&amacr;ler (Muler), and as M&amacr;ler is in the midst of a populous country he lives there himself. The country of Bagl&amacr;&ndotb;a has pleasant springs and running waters. The mangoes of that region are very sweet and large, and are gathered for nine months from the beginning of immaturity<note n=2><hi>Gh&amacr;rag&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;unripeness.&rsquo;</note> until the end. It has many grapes, but not of the best kinds. The aforesaid Raja does not drop the thread of caution and prudence in dealing with the rulers of Gujarat, the Deccan, and Khandesh. He has never gone himself to see any of them, and if any of them has wished to stretch out his hand to possess his kingdom, he has remained undisturbed through the support of the others. After the provinces of Gujarat, the Deccan, and Khandesh came into the possession of the late king (Akbar), Bharj&imacr;v came to Burhanpur and had the honour of kissing his feet, and after being enrolled among his servants was raised to the mansab of 3,000. At this time, when &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n went to Burhanpur, he brought eleven elephants as an offering. He came to Court in attendance on my son, and in accordance with his friendship and service was dignified with royal favours, and had presented to him a jewelled sword, an elephant, a horse, and dress of honour. After some days I conferred on him three rings of jacinth (<hi>y&amacr;q&umacr;t</hi>), diamond, and ruby. On Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba <pb id=pb397 n=397>(Thursday), the 27th, N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n Begam prepared a feast of victory for my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, and conferred on him dresses of honour of great price, with a <hi>n&amacr;dir&imacr;</hi> with embroidered flowers, adorned with rare pearls, a <hi>sarp&imacr;ch</hi> (turban ornament) decorated with rare gems, a turban with a fringe of pearls, a waistbelt studded with pearls, a sword with jewelled <hi>pardala</hi> (belt), a <hi>ph&umacr;l ka&tdotb;&amacr;ra</hi> (dagger), a <hi>sada</hi> (?) of pearls, with two horses, one of which had a jewelled saddle, and a special elephant with two females. In the same way she gave his children and his ladies dresses of honour, <hi>t&umacr;quz</hi> (nine pieces) of cloth with all sorts of gold ornaments, and to his chief servants as presents a horse, a dress of honour, and a jewelled dagger. The cost of this entertainment was about 300,000 rupees. Presenting on the same day a horse and dress of honour to &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n and Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, his brother, I gave them leave to go to the Sarkar of Kalpi, which had been given them in jagir, and also dismissed &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n to his jagir, which was in the Subah of Gujarat, with a dress of honour and an elephant. I dismissed Sayyid &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr;, who was a jagirdar of Behar, with a gift of a horse.

<p>It was frequently reported to me that &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n had become old and weak, so as to be unfit for active duty, and the Subahs of Kabul and Bangash is a land of disturbance, and to subdue the Afghans required riding and active movement. Inasmuch as caution is the condition of rule, I appointed Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Subahdar of Kabul and Bangash, giving him a dress of honour, and promoted &Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n to the governorship of the province of Thatta. Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n Fat&hdotb;-jang had sent as an offering from Behar forty-nine elephants; these were submitted to me. On this day they brought some <hi>s&omacr;na-kela</hi> (golden plantains, bananas) for me. I had never eaten such plantains before. In size they are one finger, and are very sweet and of good flavour; they <pb id=pb398 n=398>have no resemblance to plantains of other descriptions, but are somewhat indigestible, so that from the two that I ate I experienced heaviness, whilst others say they can eat as many as seven or eight. Though plantains are really unfit to eat, yet of all the kinds this is the one fit to eat. This year, up to the 23rd of the month of Mihr, Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n sent Gujarat mangoes by post (<hi>&ddotb;&amacr;k-chauk&imacr;</hi>).

<p>On this date I heard that Mu&hdotb;ammad Ri&zdotb;&amacr;, ambassador of my brother &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s, gave up the deposit of his life at Agra through the disease of <hi>ish&amacr;l</hi> (diarrh&oelig;a). I made the merchant Mu&hdotb;ammad Q&amacr;sim, who had come from my brother, his executor, and ordered that according to the will he should convey his goods and chattels to the Shah, so that he might grant them in his own presence to the heirs of the deceased. Elephants and dresses of honour were conferred on Sayyid Kab&imacr;r and Ba&khbarb;tar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Wakils of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba, the 13th &Amacr;b&amacr;n, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; Beg, Turkm&amacr;n, who is dignified with the title of J&amacr;n-sip&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, came from the Deccan and waited on me. His father was included among the Amirs of Iran. He had come from Persia in the time of the late king Akbar, and having a mansab conferred on him was sent to the Deccan. He was brought up in that Subah. Although he had been appointed to a duty, yet as my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n came at this time to pay his respects and represented his sincerity and devotion, I ordered that he should come post to Court and have the good fortune to wait upon me and then return. On this day I promoted &Umacr;d&amacr; R&amacr;m<note n=1>The &Umacr;d&amacr;j&imacr; R&amacr;m of Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, i, 142.</note> to the rank of 3,000 personal and 1,500 horse. He is a brahmin by caste, and was much relied on by &ayin;Ambar. At the time when &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n went against &ayin;Ambar, &Amacr;dam &Khbarb;&amacr;n &Hdotb;ab&shbarb;&imacr;, J&amacr;d&umacr; R&amacr;y, B&amacr;b&umacr; R&amacr;y K&amacr;yath, &Umacr;d&amacr; R&amacr;m, and some other Sard&amacr;rs of Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-l-mulk <pb id=pb399 n=399>left him and came to &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n. After &ayin;Ambar&apos;s defeat they, by the persuasions of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n and the deceit of &ayin;Ambar, left the right road again and gave up their loyalty and service. &ayin;Ambar took an oath on the Koran to &Amacr;dam &Khbarb;&amacr;n and put him off his guard, and, capturing him deceitfully, imprisoned him in the fort of Daulatabad, and at last killed him. B&amacr;b&umacr; R&amacr;y K&amacr;yath and &Umacr;d&amacr; R&amacr;m came away and went to the borders of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s dominions, but he would not admit them into his territory. About that time B&amacr;b&umacr; R&amacr;y K&amacr;yath lost his life (lit. played away the coin of existence) by the deceit of his intimates, and &ayin;Ambar sent a force against &Umacr;d&amacr; R&amacr;m. He fought well and defeated &ayin;Ambar&apos;s army. But afterwards, as he could not remain in that country, he threw himself on to the borders of the royal dominions, and, having got a promise, came with his family and dependants and entered the service of my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n. That son distinguished him with favours and kindnesses of all sorts, and made him hopeful by giving him a mansab of 3,000 personal and 1,000 horse, and brought him to Court. As he was a useful servant, I increased this by 500 horse. I also increased the mansab of &Shbarb;&amacr;h-b&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had one of 2,000 personal and 1,500 horse, by 500 more horse, and gave him the faujd&amacr;rship of the Sarkar of S&amacr;rangp&umacr;r and a part of the Subah of Malwa. A special horse and elephant were given to &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n. On Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba (Thursday), the 10th of the month, my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n produced his own offerings&mdash;jewels and jewelled things and fine cloths and other rare things. These were all laid out in the courtyard of the jharokha, and arranged together with the horses and elephants adorned with gold and silver trappings. In order to please him I came down from the jharokha and looked through them in detail. Among all these there was a fine ruby they had bought for my son at the port of Goa for 200,000 rupees; its weight was 19&frac12; tanks, or <pb id=pb400 n=400>17 miskals, and 5&frac12; surkhs. There was no ruby in my establishment over 12 tanks, and the jewellers agreed to this valuation. Another was a sapphire, among the offerings of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n; it weighed 6 tanks and 7 surkhs and was valued at 100,000 rupees. I never before saw a sapphire of such a size and good colour. Another was the Chamko&rdotb;a diamond, also of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s; its weight was 1 tank and 6 surkhs, which they valued at 40,000 rupees. The name of Chamko&rdotb;a is derived from this, that there is in the Deccan a plant called <hi>s&amacr;g-i-chamko&rdotb;a</hi>.<note n=1><hi>Jamk&umacr;ra</hi> is given in Forbes as the Dakhani word for a covering made of reeds or palm-leaves and used in rainy weather.</note> At the time when Murta&zdotb;&amacr; Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-l-mulk conquered Berar he had gone one day with his ladies round to look at the garden, when one of the women found the diamond in a chamkora vegetable, and took it to Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-l-mulk. From that day it became known as the Chamkora diamond, and came into the possession of the present Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n during the interregnum (<hi>fatar&amacr;t</hi>) of Ahmadnagar. Another was an emerald, also among &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s offerings. Although it is from a new mine, it is of such a beautiful colour and delicacy as I have never before seen. Again, there were two pearls, one of the weight of 64 surkhs, or 2 miskals and 11 surkhs, and it was valued at 25,000 rupees. The other weighed 16 surkhs, and was of exceeding roundness and fineness. It was valued at 12,000 rupees. Another was a diamond from the offerings of Qu&tumlb;bu-l-mull, in weight 1 tank, and valued at 30,000 rupees. There were 150 elephants, out of which three had gold trappings, chains, etc., and nine had silver trappings. Though twenty<note n=2>The MS. has eight.</note> elephants were put into my private stud, five were very large and celebrated. The first, N&umacr;r-ba&khbarb;t, which my son presented on the day of meeting, was worth 125,000 rupees. The second, Mah&imacr;pati,<note n=3>In the MSS. the name seems to be Hansomat (swan-like?).</note> from the offerings of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, was valued <pb id=pb401 n=401>at 100,000 rupees; I gave it the name of Durjans&amacr;l. Another, also from his offerings, was Ba&khbarb;t-buland, and valued at 100,000 rupees; I called it Gir&amacr;n-b&amacr;r. Another was Qadd&umacr;s &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and the fifth was Im&amacr;m Ri&zdotb;&amacr;. They were from the offerings of Qu&tumlb;bu-l-mulk. Each of the two was valued at 100,000 rupees. Again, there were 100 Arab and Iraq horses, most of which were good horses. Of these, three had jewelled saddles. If the private offerings of my son and those of the rulers of the Deccan were to be written down in detail, it would be too long a business. What I accepted of his presents was worth 2,000,000 rupees. In addition to this he gave his (step-)mother,<note n=1>Text has <hi>w&amacr;lida-i-&khbarb;&umacr;d</hi>, &lsquo;his own mother.&rsquo;</note> N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n Begam, offerings worth 200,000 rupees, and 60,000 rupees to his other mothers and the Begams. Altogether my son&apos;s offerings came to 2,260,000 rupees, or 75,000 tumans of the currency of Iran or 6,780,000 current T&umacr;r&amacr;n-kh&amacr;n&imacr;s. Such offerings had never been made during this dynasty. I showed him much attention and favour; in fact, he is a son who is worth grace and kindness. I am very pleased and satisfied with him. May God Almighty allow him to enjoy long life and prosperity!

<p>As I had never in my life had any elephant-hunting, and had a great desire to see the province of Gujarat and to look on the salt sea, and my huntsmen had often gone and seen wild elephants and fixed on hunting-places, it occurred to me to travel through Ahmadabad and look on the sea, and having hunted elephants on my return, when it was hot and the season for hunting them to go back to Agra. With this intention I despatched to Agra &Hdotb;a&zdotb;rat Maryamu-z-zam&amacr;n (his mother) and the other Begams and people of the harem with the baggage and extra establishments, and betook myself to a tour in the Subah of Gujarat to hunt, with such as were indispensable <pb id=pb402 n=402>with me. On the eve of Friday in the month of &Amacr;b&amacr;n (precise date not given, but apparently the 10th), I marched auspiciously and happily from Mandu, and pitched on the bank of the tank of N&amacr;lchh&amacr;. In the morning I went out to hunt and killed a blue bull with my gun. On the eve of Saturday, Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n was presented with a special horse and an elephant, and obtained leave to go to his Subah of Kabul and Bangash. At his request I conferred on Ra&shbarb;&imacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n a robe of honour, a horse, an elephant, and a jewelled dagger, and appointed him to assist him. I promoted Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Hdotb;usain to the post of bakhshi in the Deccan, and M&imacr;rak &Hdotb;usain to that of news-writer in the same Subah. R&amacr;ja Kaly&amacr;n,<note n=1>A repetition.</note> son of R&amacr;ja To&ddotb;ar Mal, had come from the Subah of Orissa; on account of some faults which had been attributed to him he had for some days been forbidden the honour of paying his respects. After enquiry his innocence appeared clear, and having given him a dress of honour and a horse, I appointed him to do duty together with Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n in Bangash. On Monday I gave the Wakils of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n jewelled turban fringes after the fashion of the Deccan, one of the value of 5,000 rupees and the other worth 4,000 rupees. As Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n and R&amacr;y R&amacr;y&amacr;n had performed the duties of Wakils to my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n in a becoming manner, I raised them both in mansab and honoured R&amacr;y R&amacr;y&amacr;n with the title of Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, which among Hindus is the highest title. In truth he is a servant worthy of patronage. On Saturday, the 12th, I went to hunt and shot two female nilgaw. As the hunting-ground was a long way from this halting-place, I on Monday marched 4&frac12; kos<note n=2>The MSS. have 3&frac34; kos.</note> and pitched at the village of Kaid &Hdotb;asan. On Tuesday, the 15th, I killed three blue bulls, the larger one of which weighed 12 maunds. On this day M&imacr;rz&amacr; <pb id=pb403 n=403>Rustam escaped a great danger.<note n=1>Text <hi>&khbarb;a&tumlb;a&hamza;</hi>, &lsquo;fault,&rsquo; but the MSS. show that the word is <hi>&khbarb;atar</hi>, &lsquo;danger.&rsquo;</note> It seems that he had taken aim at a mark and fired his gun. Then he reloaded, and as his bullet was very flexible, he rested the gun on his chest and put the bullet between his teeth in order that he might contract it and put it right. By chance the match reached the pan, and his chest at the place where the gun was resting was burnt to the extent of the palm of the hand, and the grains of powder got into his skin and flesh and a wound was made, and he suffered much pain.<note n=2>The passage is obscure, and the MSS. do not throw much light on it. Fortunately for the M&imacr;rz&amacr;, there was no bullet in his gun. The word which I have translated by &lsquo;flexible&rsquo; is <hi>raw&amacr;n</hi>. Perhaps the meaning is quite different. Possibly it is &ldquo;he would fire a shot and then reload. As many of his bullets had been shot away, he put a pellet (<hi>&ghbarb;alul&amacr;</hi>) into his mouth and was shaping it,&rdquo; etc.</note>

<p>On Sunday (?), the 16th,<note n=3>He has just spoken of Tuesday as the 15th! And as Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r did not shoot on Sundays, Sunday must be a mistake for Wednesday. It is Wednesday in I.O. MS. 305.</note> four nilgaw were killed, three females and one <hi>b&umacr;kra</hi><note n=4>Perhaps <hi>b&umacr;kra</hi> here means a male nilgaw; <hi>b&umacr;kra</hi> means also a he-goat.</note> nilgaw. On Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba (Thursday) I went to look round a hill valley in which there was a waterfall near the camp. At this season it had but little water, but as for two or three days they had dammed the watercourse and, about the time of my reaching the place, let it loose, it flowed over very well. Its height might be 20 <hi>gaz</hi>. It separates at the top of the hill and flows down. In this way it is a great boon (<hi>&ghbarb;an&imacr;mat</hi>) on the road. Having enjoyed the usual cups on the edge of the stream and the shade of the hill, I came back to the camp at night. On this day the Zamindar of Jaitpur, whose offences I had forgiven at the request of my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, had the good fortune of kissing the threshold. On Friday, the 18th, a large blue bull and a bukra, and on Saturday, the 19th, two females, were killed. <pb id=pb404 n=404>As my huntsmen represented that there was much game in the parganah of &Hdotb;&amacr;&sdotb;ilp&umacr;r, I left my large camp at this halting-place, and on Sunday, the 20th, and with some of my close attendants, hastened to &Hdotb;&amacr;&sdotb;ilp&umacr;r, a distance of 3 kos. M&imacr;r &Hdotb;us&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n, son of M&imacr;r Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain Inj&umacr;, who has the title of &ayin;A&zdotb;udu-d-daulah, was promoted to the mansab, original and increase, of 1,000 personal and 400 horse. I presented Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &Hdotb;usain Q&umacr;&shbarb;-begi and Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r Q&umacr;rch&imacr;, who had been appointed to do duty in Bangash, with an elephant each. On this day some &Hdotb;usain&imacr; grapes without seeds arrived from Kabul; they were very fresh. The tongue of this suppliant at the throne of God fails in gratitude for the favours by which, notwithstanding a distance of three months, grapes from Kabul arrive quite fresh in the Deccan. On Monday, the 21st, three small blue bulls, on Tuesday, the 22nd, one blue bull and three cows, and on Kam-&shbarb;amba (Wednesday), the 23rd, one cow, were killed. On Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba, the 24th, a feast of cups was held on the bank of the tank of &Hdotb;&amacr;&sdotb;ilp&umacr;r. Cups were presented to my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n and some of the great Amirs and private servants. On Y&umacr;suf &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of &Hdotb;usain &Khbarb;&amacr;n (Tukriyah), who was of the houseborn ones worthy of patronage, was bestowed the mansab of 3,000 personal and 1,500 horse, original and increase, and he was dismissed to the faujd&amacr;rship of Gon&ddotb;w&amacr;na, dignifying him with a gift of a dress of honour and an elephant. R&amacr;y Bih&amacr;r&imacr; D&amacr;s, the diwan of the Subah of the Deccan, had the good fortune to kiss the threshold. On Friday J&amacr;n-sip&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n was exalted with a standard, presented with a horse and a dress of honour, and despatched to the Deccan. This day I made a remarkable shot with a gun. By chance there was inside the palace a <hi>khirn&imacr;</hi> tree (<hi>Mimusops Kauki</hi>). A <hi>qur&imacr;&shbarb;a</hi><note n=1>This is the same kind of bird that N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n is mentioned as having shot. Perhaps a green pigeon is meant.</note> (?) came <pb id=pb405 n=405>and sat on a high branch, and I saw its breast in the midst of it. I fired at it and struck it in the middle of its breast; from where I stood to the top of the branch was 22 gaz. On Saturday, the 26th, marching about 2 kos, I pitched at the village of Kam&amacr;lp&umacr;r. On this day I shot a blue bull.<note n=1>Text <hi>n&imacr;la</hi>, without the addition of <hi>gaw</hi>. The MSS. have <hi>gor</hi> or <hi>chor</hi>, a pheasant (?).</note> Rustam &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was one of the principal attendants of my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, and who had been appointed from Burhanpur with a body of the royal servants against the zamindars of Gon&ddotb;w&amacr;na, having taken a tribute of 110 elephants and 120,000 rupees, came this day to wait upon me. Z&amacr;hid, son of &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, was given the mansab of 1,000 personal and 400 horse, original and increase. On Sunday, the 27th, I hunted with hawks and falcons. On Monday I killed a large blue bull and a bukra; the bull weighed 12&frac12; maunds. On Tuesday, the 29th, a blue bull was killed. Bahl&umacr;l Miy&amacr;na and Allah-y&amacr;r came from service in Gon&ddotb;w&amacr;na, and had the good fortune to wait upon me. Bahl&umacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n is the son of &Hdotb;asan Miy&amacr;na, and Miy&amacr;na is an Afghan tribe. In the commencement of his career Hasan was a servant of &Sdotb;&amacr;diq &Khbarb;&amacr;n, but a servant who recognized the king (worthy of a king&apos;s service), and was at last included among the royal servants and died on service in the Deccan. After his death his sons were granted mansabs. He had eight sons, and two of them became famous as swordsmen. The elder brother in his youth gave up the deposit of his life. Bahl&umacr;l by degrees was promoted to the mansab of 1,000. At this time my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n arrived at Burhanpur, and, finding him worthy of patronage, made him hopeful with a mansab of 1,500 personal and 1,000 horse. As he had not yet waited on me and was very desirous to kiss the threshold, I summoned him to Court. He is in truth <pb id=pb406 n=406>a good &Khbarb;&amacr;na-z&amacr;da (household-born one), inasmuch as his heart is adorned with the perfection of bravery and his exterior is not wanting in good appearance. The mansab my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n had bespoken for him was granted at his request, and he was honoured with the title of Sar-buland &Khbarb;&amacr;n. Allah-y&amacr;r Koka was also a brave youth and a servant worthy of patronage. Finding him fit and suitable for service in my presence, I sent for him to Court. On Kam-&shbarb;amba (Wednesday), the 1st of the month of &Amacr;&zbarb;ar, I went out to hunt and shot a blue bull. On this day the Kashmir<note n=1>Elliot, vi, 352.</note> reports were laid before me. One was that in the house of a certain silk-seller two girls were born with teeth, and with their backs as far as the waist joined together, but the heads, arms, and legs were separate; they lived a short time and died. On Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba, the 2nd, on the bank of a tank where my tents were, a feast of cups was held. Presenting La&shbarb;kar &Khbarb;&amacr;n with a dress of honour and an elephant, I promoted him to the duty of diwan of the Subah of the Deccan, and gave him the mansab of 2,500 personal and 1,500 horse, original and increase. To each of the Wakils of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n two<note n=2>The &lsquo;two&rsquo; is omitted in text.</note> <hi>kaukab-i-&tumlb;&amacr;li&ayin;</hi> (horoscope star) muhrs, the weight of each of which was 500 ordinary muhrs, were given. I gave a horse and robe of honour to Sar-buland &Khbarb;&amacr;n. As fitting service and approved activity were manifest in Allah-y&amacr;r Koka, I honoured him with the title of Himmat &Khbarb;&amacr;n and gave him a dress of honour. On Friday, the 3rd, I marched 4&frac14; kos and halted the royal standards in the parganah of Di&khbarb;t&amacr;n.<note n=3>In Sark&amacr;r M&amacr;nd&umacr; (Jarrett, ii, 207) Debi Prasad&apos;s Hindi version has <hi>Dakn&amacr;</hi>.</note> On Saturday also I marched 4&frac14; kos and halted at the township of Dh&amacr;r.

<p>Dh&amacr;r is one of the old cities, and R&amacr;ja Bhoj, who was <pb id=pb407 n=407>one of the great Rajas of Hindustan, lived in it. From his time 1,000<note n=1>The MSS. have &ldquo;more than 1,000.&rdquo; R&amacr;ja Bhoj&apos;s date, according to Tod, is 567 <hi rend=sc>A.D.</hi> (Jarrett, ii, 211).</note> years have passed, and in the time of the Sultans of Malwa it was for a long time the capital. At the time when Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad Tu&ghbarb;luq was proceeding to the conquest of the Deccan, he built a fort of cut stone on the top of a ridge. Outside it is very showy and handsome, but inside the fort is devoid of buildings. I ordered them to measure its length, breadth, and height. The length inside the fort was 12 <hi>&tumlb;an&amacr;b</hi>, 7 gaz; the breadth, 17 tanab, 13 gaz, and the breadth of the fort wall 19&frac12; gaz. Its height up to the battlements appeared to be 17&frac12; gaz. The length of the outer circuit (?) of the fort was 55 tanabs. &ayin;Am&imacr;d &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Ghbarb;or&imacr;, who was called Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and who in the time of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad, son of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n F&imacr;r&umacr;z, king of Delhi, had complete authority over the province of Malwa, built the J&amacr;mi&ayin; mosque in the inhabitable part outside the fort, and opposite the gate of the mosque fixed a quadrangular iron column. When Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Bah&amacr;dur of Gujarat took the province of Malwa into his own possession, he wished to transfer this column to Gujarat. The artificers did not take proper precautions when they lowered it, and it fell and broke into two pieces, one of them of 7&frac12; gaz and the other of 4&frac14; gaz. The column was 1&frac14; gaz round. As it was lying there useless, I ordered them to take the larger piece to Agra and put<note n=2>This iron pillar is not now in existence at the mausoleum of Akbar (Note of Sayyid A&hdotb;mad). The pieces of the pillar are still lying at Dh&amacr;r, outside the L&amacr;t Musjid (I.G., new ed., xi, 295).</note> it up in the courtyard of the mausoleum of H.M. Akbar, and to burn a lamp on the top of it at night. The aforesaid mosque has two gates. In front of the arch of one gate some sentences in prose have been carved on a stone tablet; their purport is that Am&imacr;d &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Ghbarb;or&imacr; founded this mosque in the <pb id=pb408 n=408>year 870,<note n=1>The MSS. have 807, and this is correct, for Dil&amacr;war conquered Malwa in 803 = 1400.</note> and on the arch of the other gate a <hi>qa&sdotb;&imacr;da</hi> has been written, and these few couplets are from it&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;The lord of the age the star of the sphere of glory,
    <l>Centre of the people of the earth, sun of the zenith of perfection,
    <l>Asylum and support of religious law, &ayin;Am&imacr;d &Shbarb;&amacr;h D&amacr;&hamza;&umacr;d,<note n=2>Probably this means that &ayin;Am&imacr;d was the son of D&amacr;&hamza;&umacr;d.</note>
    <l>In whose excellent qualities &Ghbarb;or glories,
    <l>Helper and protector of the Faith of the Prophet, Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n,
    <l>Who has been chosen by the most mighty Lord (God),
    <l>Founded the J&amacr;mi&ayin; mosque in the city of Dh&amacr;r,
    <l>At a fortunate, auspicious time, on a day of happy omen.
    <l>The date of eight hundred and seven<note n=3>Text 70, but should be 7. 807 = 1405.</note> had passed
    <l>When the Court of hopes was completed by Fortune.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>When Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n gave up the deposit of his life there was no king with full dominion over Hindustan, and it was a time of confusion. H&umacr;&shbarb;ang, son of Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was just and possessed of courage, seeing his opportunity, sat on the throne of sovereignty in Malwa. After his death through destiny the rule was transferred<note n=4>A son of H&umacr;&shbarb;ang. Mu&hdotb;ammad &Shbarb;&amacr;h, intervened.</note> to Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d &Khbarb;alj&imacr;, son of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n, who had been Vizier to H&umacr;&shbarb;ang and passed from him to his son &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n, and after him to N&amacr;&sdotb;iru-d-d&imacr;n, son of &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n, who gave his father poison and sat on the throne of infamy. From him it passed to his son Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d. Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Bah&amacr;dur of Gujarat took from Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d the province of Malwa. The succession of kings of Malwa ended with the aforesaid Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d.

<p>On Monday, the 6th, I went to hunt and shot a female nilgaw. Presenting an elephant to M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;arafu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain K&amacr;&shbarb;&ghbarb;ar&imacr;, I dismissed him to duty in the Subah of Bangash. A present of a jewelled dagger, a muhr of 100 tolas, and 20,000 darbs was made to &Umacr;d&amacr; R&amacr;m. On Tuesday, the 7th, I shot an alligator in the tank at Dh&amacr;r. Though only the top of his snout was visible and the rest of his body was hidden in the water, I fired <pb id=pb409 n=409>at a guess and hit him in his lungs and killed him with a single shot. An alligator is of the crocodile species and exists in most of the rivers of Hindustan, and grows very large. This one was not so very big. An alligator has been seen (by me) 8 gaz long and 1 gaz in breadth. On Sunday, marching 4&frac12; kos, I halted at Sa&ayin;dalp&umacr;r. In this village there is a stream over which N&amacr;&sdotb;iru-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;alj&imacr; built a bridge and erected buildings. It is a place like K&amacr;liy&amacr;da, and both are his works. Although his building is not worthy of praise, yet as it has been built in the river-bed and they have made rivulets and reservoirs, it is somewhat remarkable. At night I ordered them to place lamps all round the canals and streams. On Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba (Thursday), the 9th, a feast of cups was held. On this day I made a present to my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n of a ruby of one colour, weighing 9 tanks and 5 surkh, of the value of 125,000 rupees, with two pearls. This is the ruby which had been given to my father at the time of my birth by &Hdotb;a&zdotb;rat Maryam-mak&amacr;n&imacr;, mother of H.M. Akbar, by way of present when my face was shown, and was for many years in his <hi>sarp&imacr;ch</hi> (turban ornament). After him I also happily wore it in my sarpich. Apart from its value and delicacy, as it had come down as of auspicious augury to the everlasting State, it was bestowed on my son. Having raised Mub&amacr;riz &Khbarb;&amacr;n to a mansab of 1,500 personal and horse, I appointed him to the faujd&amacr;rship of the province of Mew&amacr;t, distinguishing him with the present of a dress of honour, a sword, and an elephant. A sword was given to Himmat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Rustam &Khbarb;&amacr;n. I gave Kam&amacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the huntsman, who is one of the old servants and is always present with me on hunting expeditions, the title of &Shbarb;ik&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n (hunting-&Khbarb;&amacr;n). Appointing &Umacr;d&amacr; R&amacr;m to service in the Subah of the Deccan, I conferred on him a dress of honour, an elephant, and Iraq horses (lit. wind-footed ones), and sent with him for the <pb id=pb410 n=410>Commander-in-Chief, Khankhanan, the &Amacr;t&amacr;l&imacr;q, a special gilt dagger (<hi>zar-ni&shbarb;&amacr;n</hi>). On Friday, the 10th, I halted. On Saturday, the 11th, I marched 3&frac34; kos and halted at the village of &Hdotb;alwat.<note n=1>The MSS. have Jalot (as in the Hindi version).</note> On Sunday, the 12th, marching 5 kos, I halted in the parganah<note n=2>Text, &ldquo;the parganah aforesaid.&rdquo; But the MSS. have Badnor. See <hi>infra</hi>, p. 204 of text. (In this passage the Hindi version has <hi>Madlor</hi>.)</note> of Badnor. This parganah from the time of my father had been in the jagir of Ke&shbarb;o D&amacr;s M&amacr;r&umacr;,<note n=3>Blochmann, p. 502.</note> and in fact had become a kind of <hi>wa&tumlb;an</hi> (native country) to him. He had constructed gardens and buildings. Out of these one was a well (<hi>b&amacr;ol&imacr;</hi>) (step-well probably) on the road, which appeared exceedingly pleasant and well made. It occurred to me that if a well had to be made anywhere on a roadside it should be built like this one. At least two such ought to be made.

<p>On Monday, the 13th, I went to hunt and shot a blue bull. From the day on which the elephant N&umacr;r-ba&khbarb;t was put into the special elephant stables, there was an order that he should be tied up in the public palace (court). Among animals elephants have the greatest liking for water; they delight to go into the water, notwithstanding the winter and the coldness of the air, and if there should be no water into which they can go, they will take it from a water-bag (<hi>ma&shbarb;k</hi>) with their trunks and pour it over their bodies. It occurred to me that however much an elephant delights in water, and it is suited to their temperament, yet in the winter the cold water must affect them. I accordingly ordered the water to be made lukewarm (as warm as milk) before they (the elephants) poured it into their trunks. On other days when they poured cold water over themselves they evidently shivered, but with warm water, on the contrary they were delighted. This usage is entirely my own.

<pb id=pb411 n=411><p>On Tuesday, the 14th, marching 6 kos, I halted at S&imacr;lga&rdotb;h (Sabalga&rdotb;h ?). On Wednesday, the 15th, crossing the Mah&imacr; River, a halt was made near R&amacr;mga&rdotb;h. A march of 6 kos was made on Thursday, the 16th, and a halt was made and a feast of cups held at a waterfall near the camp. Distinguishing Sar-buland &Khbarb;&amacr;n with a standard and giving him an elephant, I dismissed him to do duty in the Deccan. His mansab, original and increase, was fixed at 1,500 personal and 1,200 horse. R&amacr;ja Bh&imacr;m Nar&amacr;yan, Zamindar of Gadeha, who had been promoted to the mansab of 1,000 horse, obtained leave to go to his jagir. Having raised R&amacr;ja Bharj&imacr;v, Zamindar of Bagl&amacr;&ndotb;a, to the mansab of 4,000, I gave him leave to go to his native country, and an order was given that when he arrived there he should send to Court his eldest son, who was his successor, that he might do duty in my presence. I honoured &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr; Bal&umacr;ch, who was the chief of the huntsmen and was an active and old servant, with the title of Bal&umacr;ch &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On Friday, the 17th, marching 5 kos, I alighted at the village of Dh&amacr;vala. On Saturday, the 18th, which was the feast of Qurb&amacr;n, after the Qurb&amacr;n rites had been performed, marching 3&frac14; kos, I halted on the bank of the tank of the village of N&amacr;gor.<note n=1>MSS. B&amacr;kor.</note> On Sunday, the 19th, marching about 5 kos, the royal standards were erected on the bank of the tank of the village of Samriya. On Monday, the 20th, marching 4&frac14; kos, we alighted at the chief place of the Do&hdotb;ad<note n=2>Da&hdotb;&umacr;t in MSS. But Do&hdotb;ad seems right, as it means two boundaries.</note> parganah. This parganah is on the boundary between Malwa and Gujarat. Until I passed Badnor the whole country was a jungle, with an abundance of trees and stony land. On Tuesday, the 21st, I halted. On Kam-&shbarb;amba (Wednesday), the 22nd, marching 5&frac14; kos, I halted at the village of Rany&amacr;d (Ren&amacr;v ?). On Thursday, the 23rd, I halted and held a feast of cups on the bank of <pb id=pb412 n=412>the village tank. On Friday, the 24th, marching 2&frac12; kos, the royal standards were hoisted at the village of J&amacr;lot. At this halt some jugglers from the Carnatic came and showed their tricks. One of them placed one end of an iron chain, 5&frac12; gaz in length and weighing 1 seer and 2 dams,<note n=1>The <hi>dam</hi> was also used as a weight, and was equal to 5 <hi>t&amacr;nk</hi> or 1 <hi>tola</hi>, 8 <hi>masha</hi>, 7 <hi>sur&khbarb;</hi> (Blochmann, p. 31).</note> in his throat and slowly swallowed it with the aid of water. It was for a while in his stomach; after this he brought it up. On Saturday, the 25th, there was a halt. On Sunday, the 26th, marching 5 kos, I alighted at the village of N&imacr;mdah. On Monday, the 27th, also marching 5 kos, I pitched on the bank of a tank. On Tuesday, the 28th, marching 3&frac34; kos, the royal standards alighted near the township of Sahr&amacr;<note n=2>Apparently Sahr&amacr; is the name of a town, and does not mean an open space here.</note> on the edge of a tank. The flower of the lotus, which in the Hindi language they call <hi>kumudin&imacr;</hi>, is of three colours&mdash;white, blue, and red. I had already seen the blue and white, but had never seen the red. In this tank red flowers were seen blooming. Without doubt it is an exquisite and delightful flower, as they have said&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;From redness and moistness it will melt away.&rdquo;<note n=3>Perhaps the line refers to the bee, and means that the bee wishes to suck the moisture of the flower.</note>
</lg>


<p>The flower of the <hi>ka&ndotb;wal</hi><note n=4>The MSS. have <hi>gul-i-k&umacr;l</hi>, &lsquo;the flower of the tank.&rsquo; It seems to be a water-lily.</note> is larger than the kumudini. Its flower is red. I have seen in Kashmir many kanwal with a hundred leaves (petals). It is certain that it opens during the day and becomes a bud at night. The kumudini, on the contrary, is a bud during the day and opens at night. The black bee, which the people of India call <hi>bhau&ndotb;r&amacr;</hi>, always sits on these flowers, and goes inside them to drink the juice that is in both of them. It often happens that the kanwal flower closes and <pb id=pb413 n=413>the bee remains in it the whole night. In the same manner it remains in the kumudini flower. When the flower opens it comes out and flies away. As the black bee is a constant attendant on these flowers, the poets of India look on it as a lover of the flower, like the nightingale, and have put into verse sublime descriptions of it. Of these poets the chief was T&amacr;n Sen Kal&amacr;want, who was without a rival in my father&apos;s service (in fact, there has been no singer like him in any time or age). In one of his compositions he has likened the face of a young man to the sun and the opening of his eyes to the expanding of the kanwal and the exit of the bee. In another place he has compared the side-glance of the beloved one to the motion of the kanwal when the bee alights on it.

<p>At this place figs arrived from Ahmadabad. Although the figs of Burhanpur are sweet and well-grown, these figs are sweeter and with fewer seeds, and one may call them 5 per cent. better. On Kam-&shbarb;amba, the 29th, and Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba, the 30th, we halted. At this stage Sar-far&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n came from Ahmadabad and had the good fortune to kiss the threshold. Out of his offerings a rosary of pearls, bought for 11,000 rupees, two elephants, two horses, two bullocks and a riding cart, and some pieces of Gujarat&imacr; cloth, were accepted, and the remainder presented to him. Sar-far&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n is a grandson of Mus&amacr;&hdotb;ib Beg, by which name he was called by Akbar after his grandfather, who was one of the Amirs of Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n. In the beginning of my reign I increased his mansab and appointed him to the Subah of Gujarat. As he had an hereditary connection with the Court as a Khana-zada (one born in the house), he proved himself efficient in the Subah of Gujarat. Considering him worthy of patronage, I gave him the title of Sar-far&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n and raised him in the world, and his mansab has risen to 2,000 personal and 1,000 horse. On Friday, <pb id=pb414 n=414>the 1st of Day, I marched 3&frac34; kos and halted on the bank of the tank of Jhasod.<note n=1>Query &ldquo;the tank of Yasod&amacr;,&rdquo; the foster-mother of Krishna?</note> At this stage R&amacr;y M&amacr;n, captain of the Khidmatiya,<note n=2>Blochmann, p. 252.</note> caught a <hi>roh&umacr;</hi> fish and brought it. As I am particularly partial to the flesh of fish, especially that of the rohu, which is the best kind of fish in Hindustan, and I had never, notwithstanding much enquiry, had one for eleven months from the time of crossing the pass of Gh&amacr;t&imacr; Chand<note n=3>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r crossed the Gh&amacr;t&imacr; Chand or Ch&amacr;nd, between Ajmere and Malwa, in the 11th year (see p. 172), but he does not speak of having had any rohu fish there. Perhaps the reference is to his halt at R&amacr;msar shortly before coming to Gh&amacr;t&imacr; Chand. He got 104 rohu at R&amacr;msar. See p. 169.</note> until the present time, and now obtained it, I was greatly delighted. I presented a horse to R&amacr;y M&amacr;n. Although the parganah of Dohad is reckoned as within the boundary of Gujarat, yet, in fact, it was from this stage that all things appeared different. The open plains and soil are of a different kind; the people are different and the language of another description. The jungle that appeared on the road, has fruit-bearing trees, such as the mango and <hi>khirn&imacr;</hi> and tamarind, and the method of guarding the cultivated fields is with hedges of <hi>zaqq&umacr;m</hi>. The cultivators separate their fields with cactus, and leave a narrow road between them for coming and going. Since all this country has a sandy soil, when any movement takes place, so much dust rises that the faces of people are seen with difficulty, so that one should call Ahmadabad &lsquo;Gard&amacr;b&amacr;d&rsquo;<note n=4>Elliot, vi, 353.</note> (abode of dust). On Saturday, the 2nd, having marched 3&frac34; kos, I encamped on the bank of the Mah&imacr;. On Sunday, the 3rd, again after a march of 3&frac34; kos, I halted at the village of Bardala. At this stage a number of mansabdars who had been appointed to serve in Gujarat had the good fortune to kiss the threshold. Marching 5 kos on Monday, the 4th, the royal <pb id=pb415 n=415>standards halted at Chitras&imacr;m&amacr;, and the next day, Tuesday, after a march of 5 kos, in parganah Mond&amacr;.<note n=1>Mondah of Jarrett, ii, 253.</note> On this day three blue bulls were killed; one was larger than the others and weighed 13 maunds and 10 seers. On Wednesday, the 6th, I marched 6 kos and halted in parganah Nary&amacr;d.<note n=2>Text N&imacr;l&amacr;o. No such parganah is mentioned in the &Amacr;y&imacr;n; the two I.O. MSS. have Nary&amacr;d.</note> In passing through the town I scattered 1,500 rupees. On Thursday, the 7th, marching 6&frac12; kos, I halted in the parganah of Pitl&amacr;d.<note n=3>Pitl&amacr;d is mentioned in Bayley&apos;s Gujarat, p. 9, as having a very large revenue. It is the Patl&amacr;d of Jarrett, ii, 253. Text wrongly has N&imacr;l&amacr;b. Possibly Bh&imacr;l is the parganah meant.</note> In the country of Gujarat there is no larger parganah than this; it has a revenue of 700,000 rupees, equal to 23,000 current tumans of Iraq. The population of the town (<hi>qa&sdotb;ba</hi>), too, is dense. Whilst I passed through it I scattered 1,000 rupees. All my mind is bent upon this, that under any pretext the people of God may be benefited. As the chief way of riding among the people of this country is in carts, I also wished to travel in a cart. I sat for 2 kos in a cart, but was much troubled with the dust, and after this till the end of the stage rode on horseback. On the road Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n came from Ahmadabad, and had the good fortune to wait on me, and presented an offering of a pearl he had bought for 30,000 rupees. On Friday, the 8th, marching 6&frac12; kos, the place of the descent of prosperity was on the shore of the salt sea.

<p>Cambay<note n=4>Elliot, vi, 353.</note> is one of the old ports. According to the brahmins, several thousand years have passed since its foundation. In the beginning its name was Trimb&amacr;wat&imacr;, and R&amacr;ja Tryambak Kunwar had the government of the country. It would take too long to write in detail the circumstances of the aforesaid Raja as the brahmins relate it. In brief, when the turn to the government came round <pb id=pb416 n=416>to R&amacr;ja Abhay Kum&amacr;r,<note n=1>The I.O. MSS. have Abhay or Abh&imacr; K&amacr;r.</note> who was one of his grandsons, by the decree of heaven a great calamity happened to this city. So much dust and earth were poured on it that all the houses and buildings were hidden, and the means of livelihood of many people was destroyed. Before the arrival of this calamity, an idol (<hi>but</hi>), which the Raja worshipped, came in a dream and announced this event. The Raja with his family embarked in a ship, and carried away the idol with them with a pillar it had behind it for a support. By chance the ship also was wrecked by a storm of misfortune. As there was left still a term of life for the Raja, that pillar bore the boat of his existence in safety to the shore, and he proposed to rebuild the city. He put up the pillar as a mark of repopulation and the coming together of the people. As in the Hindi language they call a pillar <hi>istambh</hi> and <hi>khambh</hi>, they called the city Istambhnagar&imacr; and Khamb&amacr;wat&imacr;, and sometimes also Trimb&amacr;wat&imacr;, in connection with the Raja&apos;s name; Khamb&amacr;wat&imacr; has by degrees and much use become Khamb&amacr;yat (Cambay). This port is one of the largest ports<note n=2>Tiefenthaler, i, p. 380, etc., has an interesting notice of Cambay. He also gives a sketch of its bay (plate xxxii).</note> in Hindustan and is near a firth, which is one of the firths of the Sea of Oman. It has been estimated to be 7 kos in width, and nearly 40 kos in length. Ships cannot come inside the firth, but must cast anchor in the port of Gog&amacr;, which is a dependency<note n=3>Now so silted up that no tolerably large vessel can approach it.</note> of Cambay and situated near the sea. Thence, putting their cargoes into <hi>ghur&amacr;bs</hi><note n=4>Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l calls them <hi>t&amacr;war&imacr;</hi> (Jarrett, ii, 241).</note> (commonly called &lsquo;grabs&rsquo;) they bring them to the port of Cambay. In the same way, at the time of loading a ship they carry the cargo in ghurabs and put it in the ships. Before the arrival of the victorious host some ghurabs from European ports had come to Cambay to buy and sell, and were about to return. On Sunday, <pb id=pb417 n=417>the 10th, they decorated them and showed them to me. Taking leave they went about their business. On Monday, the 11th, I myself went on board a ghurab for about a kos on the face of the water. On Tuesday, the 12th, I went out with cheetahs (<hi>y&umacr;z</hi>), and captured two<note n=1>I.O. MSS. have &lsquo;ten.&rsquo;</note> antelope. On Wednesday, the 13th, I went to see the tank of T&amacr;rangsar (Narangsar?),<note n=2><hi>T&amacr;l t&amacr;rang.</hi> Possibly <hi>t&amacr;rang</hi> should read <hi>tarang</hi> (waves), and the meaning be that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r went to see the famous bore in the Gulf of Cambay.</note> and passed through the streets and bazaar on the way, scattering nearly 5,000 rupees. In the time of H.M. Akbar (may Allah&apos;s lights be his testimony), Kaly&amacr;n R&amacr;y, the superintendent of the port, by His Majesty&apos;s order built a wall of brick and cement round the city, and many merchants came from various quarters and settled there, and built fine houses and employed themselves in gaining their livelihood under easy circumstances. Although its market is small, it is clean and full of people. In the time of the Sultans of Gujarat the customs of this port came to a large sum. Now in my reign it is ordered that they should not take more than one in forty. In other ports, calling it a tithe, they take one in ten or one in eight, and give all kinds of trouble to merchants and travellers. In Jeddah, which is the port of Mecca, they take one in four or even more. One may imagine from this what the customs of the ports of Gujarat must have come to in the time of the former rulers. God be praised that this suppliant at the throne of God obtained the grace to remit the whole of the customs dues of his dominions, which came to a countless sum, and the very name of customs (<hi>tam&ghbarb;&amacr;</hi>) has passed away from my empire. At this time an order was given that tankas<note n=3>See Elliot, vi, 355, and note.</note> of gold and silver should be coined twice the weight of ordinary muhrs and rupees. The legend <pb id=pb418 n=418>on the gold coin was on one side the words &ldquo;Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r-&shbarb;&amacr;h&imacr;, 1027&rdquo; (1618), and on the reverse &ldquo;Struck in Cambay in the 12th year of the reign.&rdquo; The legend for silver coins was on one side &ldquo;Sikka, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r-&shbarb;&amacr;h&imacr;, 1027&rdquo;; round it this hemistich, &ldquo;King Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r of the conquering ray struck this&rdquo;; and on the reverse, &ldquo;Coined at Cambay in the 12th year of the reign,&rdquo; with this second hemistich round it&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;When after the conquest of the Deccan he came to Gujarat from M&amacr;nd&umacr;.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>In no reign except mine have tankas been coined except of copper<note n=1>In the text <hi>a&hdotb;d&imacr;</hi> occurs by mistake instead of <hi>&ayin;ahd&imacr;</hi>, and <hi>man</hi> instead of <hi>mas</hi>.</note>; the gold and silver tankas are my invention. I ordered it to be called the Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; coinage. On Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba (Thursday), the 14th the offering of Am&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the superintendent (<hi>muta&sdotb;add&imacr;</hi>) of Cambay, was laid before me in the women&apos;s apartments. His mansab was fixed, original and increase, at 1,500 personal and 400 horse. N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Qul&imacr; was honoured with the mansab, original and increase, of 3,000 personal and 600 horse. On Friday, the 15th, mounted on the elephant N&umacr;r-ba&khbarb;t, I made it run after a horse. It ran exceedingly well, and when it was stopped stood well. This is the third time that I myself have ridden it. On Saturday, the 16th, R&amacr;m D&amacr;s, son of Jay Singh<note n=2>Wrongly so in text, but <hi>Jay Singh</hi> should be corrected to <hi>R&amacr;j Singh</hi>. The son of Jay Singh, Raja of Ajmir, was R&amacr;m Singh, who was born in Sambat, 1692.</note>, was promoted to the mansab, original and increase, of 1,500 personal and 700 horse. On Sunday, the 17th, an elephant each was given to D&amacr;r&amacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n. Am&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and Sayyid B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d B&amacr;rha. In these few days during which I was encamped on the shore of the salt sea, merchants, traders, indigent people, and other inhabitants of the port of Cambay having been summoned before me, I gave each according to his condition a dress of honour or a horse or travelling money or assistance <pb id=pb419 n=419>in living. On this day, Sayyid Mu&hdotb;ammad, &Sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ib Sajj&amacr;da (Lord of the prayer carpet) of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam (a mosque near Ahmadabad), the sons of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Ghbarb;au&sumlb;, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;aidar, grandson of Miy&amacr;n Waj&imacr;h&umacr;-d-d&imacr;n, and other Shaikhs living at Ahmadabad came to meet me and pay their respects. As my desire was to see the sea and the flow and ebb of the water, I halted for ten days, and on Tuesday, the 19th (Day, about 30th December, 1618), the royal standards started for Ahmadabad. The best description of fish procurable in this place, the name of which is <hi>&ayin;arb&imacr;yat</hi>,<note n=1>Or <hi>&ayin;Arab&imacr;</hi> (Arabian?).</note> was caught and frequently brought for me by the fishermen. Without doubt these fish, are, as compared with other fish of this country, more delicious and better, but they are not of the flavour of the roh&umacr;. One might say as nine to ten or even eight to ten. Of the food which is peculiar to the people of Gujarat there is the <hi>khich&rdotb;&imacr;</hi> of <hi>b&amacr;jr&amacr;</hi> (a mixture of split peas and millet boiled together); this they also call <hi>la&zbarb;&imacr;&zbarb;a</hi>. It is a kind of split grain, which does not grow in any other country but Hindustan, and which in comparison with many other regions of India is more abundant in Gujarat; it is cheaper than most vegetables. As I had never eaten it, I ordered them to make some and bring it to me. It is not devoid of good flavour, and it suited me well. I ordered that on the days of abstinence, when I partake of dishes not made with flesh, they should frequently bring me this khichri On the said Tuesday having marched 6&frac14; kos, I halted at the village of Kos&amacr;l&amacr;. On Wednesday, the 20th, I passed through the parganah of B&amacr;br&amacr;<note n=2>M&amacr;tar or N&amacr;tar in I. O. MSS.</note> and halted on the bank of the river. This was a march of 6 kos. On Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba, the 21st, I halted and held a feast of cups. In this river I caught many fish, and divided them among the servants who were present at the feast. On Friday, the 22nd, having moved on 4 kos, I pitched at <pb id=pb420 n=420>the village of B&amacr;&rdotb;&imacr;ch&amacr;. On this road, walls came in sight from 2&frac12; to 3 <hi>gaz</hi> in length, and on enquiry it appeared that people had made them from the desire of spiritual reward. When a porter is tired on the road he places his burden on the wall and gains his breath a little, and lifting it up again with ease and without assistance from anyone proceeds towards his destination. This is one of the peculiar ideas of the people of Gujarat. The building of these walls pleased me greatly, and I ordered that in all large towns<note n=1>I. O. MS. 181 has &ldquo;in all the cities of Upper India.&rdquo;</note> they should make walls of this kind at the imperial expense. On Saturday, the 23rd marching 4&frac34; kos, the camp was pitched at the K&amacr;nkr&imacr;ya tank. Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad, grandson of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n A&hdotb;mad, the founder of the city of Ahmadabad, made this tank, and placed round it steps of stone and cement. In the middle of the tank he constructed a little garden and some buildings. Between the bank of the tank and these buildings he had made a causeway, which was the way for entering and leaving, Since this occurred a long time ago, most of the buildings had become dilapidated, and there was no place left fit to sit in. At the time when the host of prosperity was about to proceed towards Ahmadabad, &Sdotb;af&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, bakhsh&imacr; of Gujarat, repaired at the expense of government what was broken down and in ruins, and clearing out the little garden erected a new building in it. Certainly it is a place exceedingly enjoyable and pleasant. Its style pleased me. On the side where the causeway is, Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n A&hdotb;mad,<note n=2>The historian.</note> who was for a while bakhshi of Gujarat in my father&apos;s time, had made a garden on the bank of the tank. At this time a representation was made to me that &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, in consequence of a dispute that he had with &ayin;&Amacr;bid, son of Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n A&hdotb;mad, cut down the trees of this garden. I also heard that during his government <pb id=pb421 n=421>he, at a wine party, signed to a slave, and cut off the head of an unfortunate man who was not wanting in fun and jesting, merely because in a state of drunkenness he had uttered some improper expressions by way of a joke. On hearing these two reports, my sense of justice was shocked, and I ordered the Diwans to change one thousand of his two-horsed and three-horsed cavalry into one-horsed, and to deduct from his jagir the difference (of pay), which came to 7,000,000 dams<corr>.</corr>

<p>As at this stage the tomb of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam was by the roadside, I recited the <hi>f&amacr;ti&hdotb;a</hi> in passing by it. About 100,000 rupees had been spent in building this mausoleum. &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam was the son of Qu&tumlb;b &ayin;&Amacr;lam, and their family goes back to Ma&khbarb;d&umacr;m-i-Jah&amacr;niy&amacr;n<note n=1>A saint of Multan who died in 1384. See Beale, s.v. <hi>&Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Jal&amacr;l</hi>, and Jarrett, iii, 369.</note> (a saint). The people of this country, high and low, have a wonderful belief in him, and they say that &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam used to raise the dead. After he had raised several dead men, his father became aware of this and sent him a prohibition, saying it was presumption in him to meddle with the workshop of God, and was contrary to true obedience. It happened that &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam had an attendant (female) who had no children, but at &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam&apos;s prayer God Almighty bestowed a son on her. When he reached his 27th<note n=2>So in text, but surely it should be &ldquo;8th or 7th&rdquo;? It appears from the &Khbarb;az&imacr;natu-l-a&sdotb;fiy&amacr;, ii, 71, that the attendant who lost the child was a female disciple, and that the child was young.</note> year he died, and that slave came weeping and wailing into his presence, saying, &ldquo;My son has died, and he was my only son; since God Almighty gave him to me by your favour, I am hopeful that through your prayer he may become alive.&rdquo; &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam fell into thought for a time and went into his cell, and the attendant went to his son, who greatly loved her, and besought him to ask the &Shbarb;&amacr;h to make his son alive. The son, who was of tender years, went into his cell, and used much entreaty. <pb id=pb422 n=422>&Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam said, &ldquo;If you are content to give up your life for him, perhaps my petition may be accepted.&rdquo; He represented &ldquo;I am perfectly contented with what may be your wish and the desire of God.&rdquo; &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam took his son&apos;s hands, and lifting him up from the ground turned his face towards heaven and said, &ldquo;O God, take this kid in place of that one.&rdquo; Instantaneously the boy surrendered his soul to God, and &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam laid him down on his own bed and covered his face with a sheet, and coming out of the house said to that attendant, &ldquo;Go home, and get news of thy son; perhaps he may have been in a trance and not have died.&rdquo; When she arrived at her house she saw her son alive. In short, in the country of Gujarat they say many things of this sort of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam. I myself asked Sayyid Mu&hdotb;ammad, who is lord of his prayer carpet (in charge of the mausoleum), and who is not wanting in excellence and reasonableness, what was the real state of the case. He said, &ldquo;I have also heard the same from my father and grandfather, and it has come down in succession, and wisdom is from Allah.&rdquo; Although this affair is beyond the laws of understanding, yet, as it has attained great notoriety among men, it has been recorded as a strange occurrence. His departure from this perishable mansion to the eternal world took place in 880 (1475), in the time of the reign of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d B&imacr;gara, and the buildings of this mausoleum are the memorial of T&amacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n Tariy&amacr;n&imacr;,<note n=1>According to Bayley&apos;s Gujarat, p. 238, and Index, p. 515, the name is either T&amacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n T&umacr;rp&amacr;li or Narp&amacr;li.</note> who was one of the Amirs of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Muzaffar, the son of Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d.

<p>As an hour on Monday had been chosen for my entry into the city, on Sunday, the 24th, I halted. At this place some melons came from K&amacr;riz, which is a town dependent on Herat, and it is certain that in Khurasan there are no melons better than those of K&amacr;riz. Although <pb id=pb423 n=423>this is at a distance of 1,400 kos, and kafilahs (caravans) take five months to come, they arrived very ripe and fresh. They brought so many that they sufficed for all the servants. Together with these there came oranges (<hi>kau&ndotb;l&amacr;</hi>) from Bengal, and though that place is 1,000 kos distant most of them arrived quite fresh. As this is a very delicate and pleasant fruit, runners bring by post as much as is necessary for private consumption, and pass it from hand to hand. My tongue fails me in giving thanks to Allah for this.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;Thankfulness for Thy favours is one of Thy favours.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>On this day Am&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n presented two elephants&apos; tusks; they were very large, one of them being 3 cubits 8 <hi>&tumlb;ass&umacr;</hi> (finger-breadths) in length and 16 tassu in circumference; it weighed 3 maunds and 2 seers, or 24&frac12; Iraq maunds. On Monday, the 25th, after six gharis, I turned towards the city in pleasure and prosperity at the propitious hour, and mounted the elephant &Sdotb;&umacr;rat-gaj, a favourite elephant of mine, which is perfect in appearance and disposition. Although he was fractious (<hi>mast</hi>), I had confidence in my own riding and his pleasant paces (<hi>?</hi>).<note n=1><hi>Suw&amacr;r&imacr;-i-&khbarb;&umacr;d u &khbarb;wu&shbarb;-jal&umacr;-i-&umacr;</hi>, &ldquo;my own riding and his pleasant paces (?).&rdquo; It does not seem likely that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r would himself drive the elephant. The meaning here probably is that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r trusted to his being on the elephant. <hi>&Khbarb;wu&shbarb;-jal&umacr;</hi> is used lower down about another elephant, and seems to refer to the elephant&apos;s paces. See p. 214.</note> Crowds of people, men and women, had assembled, and were waiting in the streets and bazars and at the gates and the walls. The city of Ahmadabad did not seem to me so worthy of praise as I had heard. Although they had made the main road of the bazar wide and spacious, they had not suited the shops to this breadth. Its buildings are all of wood and the pillars of the shops slender and mean (<hi>zab&umacr;n</hi>). The streets of the bazar were full of dust, and there was dust from the K&amacr;nkriy&amacr; tank up to the citadel, which in the dialect of the country they call Bhadar. I hastened along scattering <pb id=pb424 n=424>money. The meaning of Bhadar is &lsquo;blessed&rsquo; (<hi>bhadra</hi>). The houses of the Sultans of Gujarat, which were inside the Bhadar, have fallen into ruin within the last fifty or sixty years, and no trace of them is left. However, our servants who have been sent to the government of this country have erected buildings. When I was proceeding from M&amacr;nd&umacr; to Ahmadabad, Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n had done up the old buildings and prepared other places for sitting that were necessary, such as a jharokha, a public audience hall, etc. As to-day was the auspicious day for the weighing of my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, I weighed him in the usual manner against gold and other things, and the 27th year from his blessed birth began in pleasure and enjoyment. I hope that the Giver of gifts will bestow him on this suppliant at His throne and let him enjoy life and prosperity. On the same day I gave the province of Gujarat in jagir to that son. From the fort of M&amacr;nd&umacr; to the fort of Cambay, by the road we came, it is 124 kos, which were traversed in twenty-eight marches and thirty halts. I remained at Cambay for ten days; from that place to the city of Ahmadabad is 21 kos; which we traversed in five marches with two halts. Altogether, from M&amacr;nd&umacr; to Cambay and from Cambay to Ahmadabad by the road we came is 145 kos, which we accomplished in two months and fifteen days; this was in thirty-three marches and forty-two halts.

<p>On Tuesday, the 26th, I went to see the J&amacr;mi&ayin; mosque, and gave with my own hand in alms to the fakirs who were present there about 500 rupees. This mosque was one of the memorials of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n A&hdotb;mad, the founder of the city of Ahmadabad. It has three gates,<note n=1>Or doors. The Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, 108, has &ldquo;in front of each gate there is a bazar.&rdquo;</note> and on each side a bazar. Opposite the gate that looks towards the east is the mausoleum of the said Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n A&hdotb;mad. In that dome Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n A&hdotb;mad, his son Mu&hdotb;ammad, and his <pb id=pb425 n=425>grandson Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n are laid to rest. The length of the court of the mosque, excluding <hi>maq&sdotb;&umacr;ra</hi> (the holy of holies), is 103<note n=1>123 in Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma.</note> cubits, and its breadth 89 cubits. Round this they have made an <hi>ayw&amacr;n</hi> (portico), in breadth 4&frac34; cubits. The flooring of the court is of trimmed bricks, and the pillars of the portico of red stone. The maqsura contains 354<note n=2>350 in I.O. MSS.</note> pillars, above which there is a dome. The length of the maqsura is 75 cubits, and its breadth 37 cubits. The flooring of the maqsura, the <hi>mihr&amacr;b</hi> (arch towards which the face is turned in prayer), and the pulpit are made of marble. On both sides of the main arch (<hi>p&imacr;sh-&tumlb;&amacr;q</hi>) are two polished minarets of cut stone, containing three <hi>&amacr;shy&amacr;na</hi> (stories) beautifully shaped and decorated. On the right-hand side of the pulpit near the recess of the maqsura they have made a separate seat for the king. The space between the pillars has been covered in with a stone platform, and round this up to the roof of the maqsura they have put stone cages<note n=3><hi>Panjara-i-sang</hi>, presumably lattice-work in stone.</note> (in which women sit so as not to be seen). The object of this was that when the king came to the Friday service or the &ayin;&Imacr;d he went up there with his intimates and courtiers, and performed his devotions. This in the dialect of the country they call the Mul&umacr;k-&khbarb;&amacr;na (King&apos;s chamber). This practice and caution were on account of the crowding of the people. Truly this mosque is a very noble building.<note n=4>See for dimensions of the mosque Bayley&apos;s Gujarat, p. 92 and note, and the authorities there quoted.</note>

<p>On Wednesday,<note n=5>Text wrongly has Sunday.</note> the 27th, I went to the monastery of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Waj&imacr;hu-d-d&imacr;n, which was near the palace, and the <hi>f&amacr;ti&hdotb;a</hi> was read at the head of his shrine, which is in the court of the monastery. &Sdotb;&amacr;diq &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was one of the chief Amirs of my father, built this monastery. <pb id=pb426 n=426>The Shaikh was a successor of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Ghbarb;au&sumlb;,<note n=1>Mu&hdotb;ammad &Ghbarb;au&sumlb; was accused of heresy by some of the Gujar&amacr;t&imacr; mullas. He was much respected by Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n, and is buried at Gwalior.</note> but a successor against whom the teacher disputed. Waj&imacr;hu-d-d&imacr;n&apos;s loyalty to him is a clear proof<note n=2>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r means that Waj&imacr;hu-d-d&imacr;n was a very learned man, and that his devotion to Mu&hdotb;ammad &Ghbarb;au&sumlb;, who was an ignorant man (<hi>umm&imacr;</hi>), shows what a great personality the latter was. Cf. Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, 169, and Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, ii, 583, where we are told that Waj&imacr;hu-d-d&imacr;n thanked God that both his Prophet and his P&imacr;r were ignorant.</note> of the greatness of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Ghbarb;au&sumlb;. &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Waj&imacr;hu-d-d&imacr;n was adorned with visible excellencies and spiritual perfection. He died thirty years ago in this city (Ahmadabad), and after him &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &ayin;Abdu-llah, according to his father&apos;s will, took his place. He was a very ascetic dervish. When he died his son &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Asadu-llah sat in his place, and also quickly went to the eternal world. After him his brother &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;aidar became lord of the prayer carpet, and is now alive, and is employed at the grave of his father and grandfather in the service of dervishes and in looking after their welfare. The traces of piety are evident on the forehead of his life. As it was the anniversary festival of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Waj&imacr;hu-d-d&imacr;n, 1,500 rupees were given to &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;aidar for the expenses of the anniversary, and I bestowed 1,500 rupees more on the band of fakirs who were present in the monastery, with my own hand in charity, and made a present of 500 rupees to the grandson (?) of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Waj&imacr;hu-d-d&imacr;n. In the same way I gave something for expenses, and land to each of his relatives and adherents according to his merit. I ordered &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;aidar to bring before me the body of dervishes and deserving people who were associated with him, in order that they might ask for money for expenses and for land. On Thursday, the 28th, I went to look round the Rustam-&Khbarb;&amacr;n-b&amacr;&rdotb;&imacr;, and scattered 1,500 rupees on the road. They call a garden a <hi>b&amacr;&rdotb;&imacr;</hi> in the language of India. This is <pb id=pb427 n=427>a garden that my brother &Shbarb;&amacr;h Mur&amacr;d made in the name of his son Rustam. I made a Thursday entertainment in this garden, and gave cups to some of my private servants. At the end of the day I went to the little garden of the <hi>&hdotb;aw&amacr;l&imacr;</hi> (mansion) of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Sikandar, which is situated in the neighbourhood of this garden, and which has exceedingly good figs. As picking the fruit with one&apos;s own hand gives it quite a different relish, and I had never before plucked figs with my own hand, their excellence in this respect was approved. &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Sikandar<note n=1>He wrote a history of Gujarat&mdash;the Mir&amacr;t-i-Sikandar&imacr;. Rieu, Cat., i, 287.</note> is by origin a Gujarati, and is not wanting in reasonableness, and has complete information about the Sultans of Gujarat. It is now eight or nine years since he has been employed among the servants (of the State). As my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n had appointed to the government of Ahmadabad Rustam &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who is one of his chief officers, at his request I, in accordance with the association of his name, presented him with (the garden) Rustam-b&amacr;&rdotb;&imacr;. On this day R&amacr;ja Kaly&amacr;n, zamindar of the province of &Imacr;&ddotb;ar, had the good fortune to kiss my threshold, and presented an elephant and nine horses as an offering; I gave him back the elephant. He is one of the most considerable zamindars on the frontier of Gujarat, and his country is close to the hill-country of the R&amacr;n&amacr;. The Sultans of Gujarat constantly sent armies against the Raja of that place. Although some of them have professed obedience and presented offerings, for the most part none of them have come to see anyone personally. After the late king Akbar conquered Gujarat, the victorious army was sent to attack him. As he understood that his deliverance lay in obedience and submission, he agreed to serve and be loyal, and hastened to enjoy the good fortune of kissing the threshold. From that date he has been enrolled among the servants (of the <pb id=pb428 n=428>State). He comes to see whoever is appointed to the government of Ahmadabad, and when work and service are necessary appears with a body of his men. On Saturday, the 1st of the month of Bahman, in the 12th year of my reign, Chandar Sen, who is one of the chief zamindars of this country, had the good fortune to kiss the threshold, and presented an offering of nine horses. On Sunday, the 2nd, I gave elephants to R&amacr;ja Kaly&amacr;n, zamindar of &Imacr;&ddotb;ar, to Sayyid Mu&sdotb;&tumlb;af&amacr;, and M&imacr;r F&amacr;&zdotb;il. On Monday I went out hawking, and scattered nearly 500 rupees on the road. On this day pears came from Badakhshan. On Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba, the 6th, I went to see the &ldquo;garden of victory&rdquo; at the village of Sair-khaiz (Sarkhej), and scattered 1,500 rupees on the way. As the tomb of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; A&hdotb;mad &Khbarb;a&tdotb;&tdotb;&umacr;<note n=1>Blochmann, 507, note.</note> is on the road, I first went there and the <hi>f&amacr;ti&hdotb;a</hi> was read. &Khbarb;a&tdotb;&tdotb;&umacr; is the name of a town in the Sarkar of N&amacr;gor, and was the birthplace of the Shaikh.<note n=2>&ldquo;&Shbarb;ai&khbarb; A&hdotb;mad &Khbarb;a&tdotb;&tdotb;&umacr;, who had the title of Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n, was born at Delhi of a noble family in 737 <hi rend=sc>A.H.</hi> (1336&ndash;7). He was the disciple and successor of B&amacr;b&amacr; Is&hdotb;&amacr;q (Isaac) Ma&ghbarb;rib&imacr;. His name was Na&sdotb;&imacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n. By the jugglery of the heavens he was separated from his home in a storm, and after a while entered the service of B&amacr;b&amacr; Is&hdotb;&amacr;q. Ma&ghbarb;rib&imacr;. He acquired from him spiritual and secular learning, and came to Gujarat in the time of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n A&hdotb;mad. High and low accepted him, and paid him homage. Afterwards he travelled to Arabia and Persia, and made the acquaintance of many saints. He is buried at Sarkhech, near A&hdotb;madabad.&rdquo;&mdash;<hi>&Amacr;y&imacr;n-i-Akbar&imacr;</hi> (vol. ii, p. 220, of Bib. Ind., ed. Jarrett, iii, 371). See Bayley&apos;s Gujarat, p. 90, note, and &Khbarb;az&imacr;natu-l-a&sdotb;fiy&amacr;, ii, 314, and Blochmann, 507, note, where the reference to the &Khbarb;az&imacr;na, 957, seems wrong. The story told in the &Khbarb;az&imacr;na is that &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; A&hdotb;mad belonged to the royal family of Delhi, and was, as a baby, blown out of his nurse&apos;s arms into the street during a storm.</note> The Shaikh lived in the time of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n A&hdotb;mad, who founded the city of Ahmadabad, and the latter had a great respect for him. The people of this country have a strange belief in him, and consider him one of the great saints. Every Friday night a great crowd of people, high and low, go to visit his shrine. Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad, son of the aforesaid Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n A&hdotb;mad, <pb id=pb429 n=429>built lofty buildings in the shape of mausoleums, mosques, and monasteries at the head of his tomb, and near his mausoleum on the south side made a large tank, and surrounded it with stone and lime (masonry). This building was completed in the time of Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n, son of the aforesaid Mu&hdotb;ammad. The shrines of several of the Sultans of Gujarat are on the bank of the tank by the feet of the Shaikh. In that dome there have been laid at rest Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d B&imacr;gara, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Mu&zumlb;affar, his son, and Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d, the martyr, grandson of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Mu&zumlb;affar, and who was the last of the Sultans of Gujarat. B&imacr;gara, in the language of the people of Gujarat, signifies &lsquo;turned-up moustache,&rsquo; and Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d had a large turned-up moustache; on this account they call him B&imacr;gara. Near his (&Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Khbarb;a&tdotb;&tdotb;&umacr;&apos;s) tomb is the dome of his ladies.<note n=1>Text <hi>&khbarb;aw&amacr;n&imacr;n</hi>, &lsquo;khans,&rsquo; but evidently this is a mistake for <hi>&khbarb;aw&amacr;t&imacr;n</hi>, the plural of <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;t&umacr;n</hi>, &lsquo;a lady.&rsquo;</note> Without doubt the mausoleum of the Shaikh is a very grand building and a beautiful place. It is estimated that 500,000 rupees were spent on it. God only knows what is true.

<p>After performing this visitation I went to Fat&hdotb;-b&amacr;&ghbarb; (garden of victory). This garden is situated on the ground on which the Commander-in-Chief, &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n &Amacr;t&amacr;l&imacr;q fought with and defeated Nab&umacr; (Nann&umacr;? Nanh&umacr;?), who gave himself the title of Mu&zumlb;affar &Khbarb;&amacr;n. On this account he called it B&amacr;&ghbarb;-i-fat&hdotb;; the people of Gujarat call it Fat&hdotb;-b&amacr;&rdotb;&imacr;. The details of this are that when, by means of the good fortune of the late king Akbar, the country of Gujarat was conquered, and Nab&umacr; fell into his hands, I&ayin;tim&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n represented that he was the son of a carter. As no son was left by Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d, and moreover there was no one of the descendants of the Sultans of Gujarat whom he could raise to the throne, he (I&ayin;tim&amacr;d) had accepted the most available course, and had made out that this was the son of Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d. He gave him <pb id=pb430 n=430>the name of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Mu&zumlb;affar, and raised him to the sovereignty. Men from necessity consented to this. As His Majesty considered the word of I&ayin;tim&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n of weight, he ignored Nab&umacr;, and for some time he did duty among the servants, and the king paid no attention to his case. In consequence of this he ran away from Fat&hdotb;p&umacr;r, and coming to Gujarat lived for some years under the protection of the zamindars. When &Shbarb;ih&amacr;bu-d-d&imacr;n A&hdotb;mad &Khbarb;&amacr;n was turned out from the government of Gujarat and I&ayin;tim&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n installed in his place, a body of the servants of &Shbarb;ih&amacr;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who were attached to Gujarat, separated from him, and remained at Ahmadabad in the hope of service with I&ayin;tim&amacr;d. After I&ayin;tim&amacr;d entered the city they had recourse to him, but had no good luck with him. They had not the face to go to &Shbarb;ih&amacr;bu-d-d&imacr;n, and had no prospects in Ahmadabad. As they were without hope they thought their remedy lay in betaking themselves to Nab&umacr;, and in making him an excuse for disturbance. With this intent 600 or 700 horsemen from among them went to Nab&umacr; and carried him off along with Lon&amacr; K&amacr;th&imacr;, under whose protection he was living, and proceeded to Ahmadabad. When he arrived near the city many wretched men on the look out for an occasion joined him, and nearly 1,000 horsemen, Mughals and Gujaratis, collected together. When I&ayin;tim&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n became aware of this he left his son &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n in the city, and hastened off in search of &Shbarb;ih&amacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was proceeding towards the Court, in order that with his help he might quiet the disturbance. Many of the men had separated themselves from him, and he read on the faces of those who were left the signs of unfaithfulness, but &Shbarb;ih&amacr;bu-d-d&imacr;n, in company with I&ayin;tim&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, turned his rein. It happened that before their arrival Nab&umacr; had entered the fort of Ahmadabad. Those who were loyal drew up their troops near the city, and the rebels came out of the fort and hastened to the <pb id=pb431 n=431>battlefield. When the army of the rebels showed itself, those of the servants of &Shbarb;ih&amacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n who were left took the wrong road and joined the enemy. &Shbarb;ih&amacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n was defeated and hastened towards Pa&tdotb;an (P&amacr;tan?), which was in the possession of the royal servants. His retinue and camp were plundered, and Nab&umacr;, bestowing mansabs and titles on the rebels, went against Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was in Baroda. The servants of the latter, like the servants of &Shbarb;ih&amacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, took the road of faithlessness and chose separation, as is related in detail in the Akbar-n&amacr;ma. In the end, after giving his word to Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad, he sent him to martyrdom, and his goods and property, which were equal to the treasure of his courtesy and grandeur, were plundered. Nearly 45,000 horsemen collected round Nab&umacr;.

<p>When this state of affairs was represented to H.M. Akbar he sent against him M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Bair&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, with a force of brave warriors. On the day when M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n arrived near the city, he drew up the ranks of good fortune. He had about 8,000 or 9,000 horse, and Nab&umacr; met him with 30,000, and drew up his host tainted with ruin. After prolonged fighting and slaughter the breeze of victory blew on the flag of the loyal, and Nab&umacr;, being defeated, fled in wretched plight. My father, in reward for this victory, gave M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n a mansab of 5,000 with the title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n and the government of the country of Gujarat. The garden that &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n made on the field of battle is situated on the bank of the River S&amacr;barmat&imacr;. He founded lofty buildings along that eminence on the river, and made a strong wall of stone and cement round the garden. The garden contains 120 <hi>jar&imacr;b</hi> of land, and is a charming resort. It may have cost 200,000 rupees. It pleased me greatly. One may say that in the whole of Gujarat there is no garden like this. Arranging a Thursday feast, I bestowed cups on my private servants, and remained there for the <pb id=pb432 n=432>night. At the end of the day, on Friday, I entered the city, scattering about 1,000 rupees on the road. At this time the gardener represented that a servant of Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n had cut down some <hi>champ&amacr;</hi> trees above the bench alongside the river. On hearing this I became angry, and went myself to enquire into the matter and to exact satisfaction. When it was established that this improper act had been committed by him, I ordered both his thumbs to be cut off as a warning to others. It was evident that Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n knew nothing of this affair, or otherwise he would have punished him there and then. On Tuesday, the 11th, the Kotwal of the city caught a thief and brought him. He had committed several thefts before, and each time they had cut off one of his members; once his right hand, the second time the thumb of his left hand, the third time his left ear, and fourth time they hamstringed him, and the last time his nose; with all this he did not give up his business, and yesterday entered the house of a grass-seller in order to steal. By chance the owner of the house was on the look out and seized him. The thief wounded the grass-seller several times with a knife and killed him. In the uproar and confusion his relatives attacked the thief and caught him. I ordered them to hand over the thief to the relatives of the deceased, that they might retaliate on him.


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;The lines of the face show the thought of your head (?).&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>On Wednesday, the 12th, 3,000 rupees were handed over to &ayin;A&zumlb;amat &Khbarb;&amacr;n and Mu&ayin;taqad &Khbarb;&amacr;n, that they might go the next day to the tomb of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; A&hdotb;mad &Khbarb;a&tdotb;&tdotb;&umacr;, and divide it among the fakirs and indigent people who had taken up their abode there. On Thursday, the 13th, I went to the lodging of my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, and held a Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba entertainment there, and distributed cups among my private servants. I gave my son the elephant Sundar Mathan,<note n=1>I.O. MSS. have Sundar Sen.</note> which was <pb id=pb433 n=433>superior to all my private elephants in speed and beauty and pleasant paces, and competed with horses, and was the first among the elephants, and one much liked by King Akbar. My son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n had a great liking for him, and frequently asked him of me, and seeing no way out of it I gave it to him with its gold belongings of chains, etc., together with a female elephant. A present of 100,000 of darbs was given to the wakils of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n. At this time it was represented<note n=1>See Elliot, vi, 355.</note> to me that Mukarram &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Mu&ayin;a&zumlb;&zumlb;am &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was the governor of Orissa, had conquered the country of &Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;, and that the Raja of that place had fled and gone into the R&amacr;jmahendra. As he was a <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;na-z&amacr;d</hi> (houseborn one) and worthy of patronage, I ordered his mansab, original and increase, to be 3,000 personal and 2,000 horse, and honoured him with drums, a horse, and a dress of honour. Between the province of Orissa and Golconda there were two zamindars, one the Raja of &Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr; and the second the Raja of R&amacr;jmahendra. The province of &Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr; has come into the possession of the servants of the Court. After this it is the turn of the country of R&amacr;jmahendra. My hope in the grace of Allah is that the feet of my energy may advance farther. At this time a petition from Qu&tumlb;bu-l-mulk reached my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n to the effect that as the boundary of his territory had approached that of the King, and he owed service to this Court, he hoped an order would be issued to Mukarram &Khbarb;&amacr;n not to stretch out his hand, and to acquire possession of his country. It was a proof of Mukarram&apos;s valour and energy that such a one as Qu&tumlb;bu-l-mulk should be apprehensive about his (Mukarram) becoming his neighbour.

<p>On this day Ikr&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, was appointed faujd&amacr;r of Fat&hdotb;p&umacr;r and its neighbourhood, and presented with a dress of honour and an elephant; Chandar <pb id=pb434 n=434>Sen, the zamindar of Halo&zbarb; (Halwad?),<note n=1>This name is doubtful, for the MSS. have a different reading, apparently Nam&umacr;d. There is a Hal&omacr;d in Gujarat (Jarrett, ii, 242). See also Bayley&apos;s Gujarat, 439. Perhaps it is the Halol of the Indian Gazetteer.</note> was given a dress of honour, a horse, and an elephant. An elephant was also given to L&amacr;ch&imacr;n Q&amacr;q&shbarb;&amacr;l. At the same time Mu&zumlb;affar,<note n=2>The existence of this son of B&amacr;q&imacr; Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n does not seem to have been known to Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l or to Blochmann. Nor is he mentioned in the Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;. See Jarrett, ii, 347, where only Payanda is spoken of as the son of B&amacr;q&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and Blochmann, p. 362. See also Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, iii, 485, the biography of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &ayin;&Imacr;s&amacr; Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n. His name appears, however, in the pedigree of his house in the Tarkh&amacr;n-n&amacr;ma of Jam&amacr;l Sh&imacr;r&amacr;z&imacr;.</note> son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; B&amacr;q&imacr; Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n, had the honour of kissing the threshold. His mother was the daughter of B&amacr;rha (Bh&amacr;r&amacr;), the zamindar of Kachh. When M&imacr;rz&amacr; B&amacr;q&imacr; died and the government of Thatta went to M&imacr;rz&amacr; J&amacr;n&imacr;, Mu&zumlb;affar was apprehensive of M&imacr;rz&amacr; J&amacr;n&imacr;, and he took refuge with the aforesaid zamindar. He had remained from his childhood until now in that country. Now that the fortunate retinue had reached Ahmadabad, he came and did homage. Though he had been reared among men of the wilds, and was unfamiliar with civilized ways and ceremonies, yet as his family had had the relations of service with our exalted dynasty from the times of Timur<note n=3>The word <hi>&sumlb;&amacr;n&imacr;</hi> in <hi>&Sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;&imacr;b-qir&amacr;n-i-&sumlb;&amacr;n&imacr;</hi> in text is a mistake.</note>&mdash;may God make his proof clear!&mdash;I considered it right to patronize him. For the present I gave him 2,000 rupees for expenses, and a dress of honour. A suitable rank will be given to him, and perhaps he will show himself efficient as a soldier.

<p>On Thursday, the 20th, I went to the &ldquo;Garden of Victory,&rdquo; and contemplated the red roses. One plot had bloomed well. There are not many red roses (<hi>gul-i-sur&khbarb;</hi>) in this country, so it was pleasant to see so many here. The anemone<note n=4><hi>&Shbarb;aq&amacr;&hamza;iq</hi>, which perhaps means tulips. In Price&apos;s Jahangir, p. 115, there is much more said about the &ldquo;Garden of Victory,&rdquo; and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s entertainment there by his wife &Khbarb;airu-n-nis&amacr;, the daughter of the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n.</note> bed, too, was not bad, and the figs had <pb id=pb435 n=435>ripened. I gathered some figs with my own hands, and weighed the largest one. It came to 7&frac12; tolas. On this day there arrived 1,500 melons from K&amacr;r&imacr;z. The &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam had sent them as a present. I gave a thousand of them to the servants in attendance, and five hundred to the women of the harem. I spent four days in this garden in enjoyment, and on Monday eve, the 24th, I came to the city. Some of the melons were given to the Shaikhs of Ahmadabad, and they were astonished to see how inferior were the Gujarat melons. They marvelled at the goodness of the Deity.

<p>On Thursday, the 27th, I held a wine-feast in the Nag&imacr;na<note n=1>Bag&imacr;na in text. Debi Prasad has <hi>Bak&imacr;n&amacr;</hi>.</note> garden, which is inside the palace grounds, and which one of the Gujarat Sultans had planted. I made my servants happy with flowing bowls. A pergola (<hi>ta&khbarb;ta</hi>) of grapes had ripened in this garden, and I bade those who had been drinking to gather the bunches with their own hands and partake of them.

<p>On Monday, the 1st of Isfand&amacr;rmu&zbarb;, I left Ahmadabad and marched towards Malwa. I scattered money on the road till we reached the bank of the K&amacr;nkriy&amacr; tank, where I halted for three days. On Thursday, the 4th, the presents of Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n were laid before me. There was nothing rare among them, nor anything that I took a fancy to, and so I felt ashamed. I gave them to my children to take into the harem. I accepted jewellery and decorated vessels and cloths to the value of a lakh, and gave him back the rest. Also about one hundred Kachhi horses were taken, but there was none of great excellence.

<p>On Friday, the 5th, I marched 6 kos, and encamped on the bank of the Ahmadabad River. As my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n was leaving Rustam &Khbarb;&amacr;n, one of his chief servants, in charge of the government of Gujarat, I, at my son&apos;s request, gave him a standard, drums, a dress <pb id=pb436 n=436>of honour, and a decorated dagger. Up till now it had not been the custom in this dynasty to give to the prince&apos;s servants standards or drums. For instance, H.M. Akbar with all his affection and graciousness to me, did not decide upon giving to my officers a title or a standard. But my consideration for this son is so unbounded that I would do anything to please him, and, in fact, he is an excellent son, and one adorned with every grace, and in his early youth has accomplished to my satisfaction, everything that he has set his hand to.

<p>On this day Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n took leave to go to his home.

<p>As the shrine of Qu&tumlb;b &ayin;&Amacr;lam, the father of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam Bu&khbarb;&amacr;r&imacr;, was in the village of Batoh,<note n=1>Banoh in text. See Bayley&apos;s Gujarat, p. 237; also Tiefenthaler, i, 377, who speaks of it as being 3 leagues south of Ahmadabad. See also Jarrett, ii, 240, n. 7.</note> and on my way, I went there and gave 500 rupees to the guardians. On Saturday, the 6th, I entered a boat on the Mahm&umacr;d&amacr;b&amacr;d River and went a-fishing. On the bank is the tomb of Sayyid Mub&amacr;rak Bu&khbarb;&amacr;r&imacr;. He was one of the leading officers of Gujarat, and his son Sayyid M&imacr;r&amacr;n erected this monument to him. It is a very lofty cupola, and there is a very strong wall of stone and lime round it. It must have cost more than two lakhs of rupees. None of the tombs of the Gujarat Sultans that I saw came up to one-tenth of it. Yet they were sovereigns, and Sayyid M&imacr;r&amacr;n was only a servant. Genius and the help of God have produced this result. A thousand blessings on a son who has made such a tomb for his father:<note n=2>For Sayyid Mub&amacr;rak and his son see Bayley&apos;s Gujarat. Sayyid Mub&amacr;rak was the patron of the author of the Mir&amacr;t-i-Sikandar&imacr;. See loc. cit., p. 454.</note>


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;That there may remain a memorial of him upon earth.&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>On Sunday I halted and fished, and caught 400 fish. One of them had no scales, and is called the <hi>sang-m&amacr;h&imacr;</hi>, <pb id=pb437 n=437>&lsquo;the stone-fish.&rsquo; Its belly was very large and swollen, so I ordered them to cut it open in my presence. Inside was a fish with scales which it had recently swallowed and which had as yet undergone no change. I told them to weigh both fish. The stone-fish came to 6&frac12; seers and the other to nearly 2.

<p>On Monday, the 8th, I marched 4&frac14; kos, and encamped in the village of Moda (Mah&amacr;ondat). The inhabitants praised the rainy season of Gujarat. It happened that on the previous night and on this day before breakfast some rain fell, and the dust was laid. As this is a sandy country, it is certain that there would not be any dust in the rainy season, nor would there be any mud. The fields would be green and cheerful. At any rate, a specimen of the rainy season has been seen by me. On Tuesday I marched 5&frac12; kos, and halted at the village of Jars&imacr;ma (Jar&imacr;sam&amacr;).<note n=1>It is the Chandsuma of Bayley&apos;s map.</note>

<p>At this stage news came that M&amacr;n Singh Sew&rdotb;&amacr; had surrendered his soul to the lords of hell. The account of this in brief is that the Sewras<note n=2>Jarrett, iii, 210; and Akbar-n&amacr;ma, translation, i, 147, n. 2.</note> are a tribe of infidel Hindus who always go with their head and feet bare. One set of them root out their hair, their beards, and moustaches, while another set shave them. They do not wear sewn garments, and their central principle is that no living creature should be injured. The Banyans regard them as their <hi>p&imacr;rs</hi> and teachers, and even worship them. There are two sects of Sewras, one called Pat&amacr; (Tap&amacr;) and the other Kanthal (Kartal). M&amacr;n Singh was the head of the latter, and B&amacr;l Chand the head of the Pat&amacr;s.<note n=3>This should be Tap&amacr;. See Addenda.</note> Both of them used to attend upon H.M. Akbar. When he died and &Khbarb;usrau fled and I pursued him, R&amacr;y Singh Bhur&tdotb;iy&amacr;, zamindar of Bikanir, who had been made an Am&imacr;r by Akbar&apos;s kindness, asked M&amacr;n Singh what <pb id=pb438 n=438>would be the duration of my reign and the chances of my success. That black-tongued fellow, who pretended to be skilled in astrology and the extraction of judgments, said to him that my reign would, at most, last for two years. The doting old idiot (R&amacr;y Singh) relied upon this, and went off without leave to his home. Afterwards, when the glorious God chose out this suppliant and I returned victorious to the capital, he came, ashamed and downcast, to Court. What happened to him in the end has been told in its proper place.<note n=1>I.O. MS., instead of <hi>&khbarb;&amacr;timat-i-a&hdotb;w&amacr;l-&umacr;</hi>, has <hi>chun&amacr;nchih a&hdotb;w&amacr;l</hi>, &ldquo;as has been stated in its place.&rdquo; This is probably correct, as Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r has already referred to his death. See also the account of the 2nd year, where he speaks of R&amacr;y Singh&apos;s going home without leave.</note> In fine, M&amacr;n Singh, in the course of three or four months, was struck with leprosy (<hi>ju&zbarb;&amacr;m</hi>), and his limbs fell off him till he was in such a state that death was by many degrees preferable to life. He was living at Bikanir, and now I remembered him and sent for him. On the road he, out of excessive fear, took poison, and surrendered his soul to the lords of hell. So long as the intentions of this suppliant at God&apos;s courts are just and right, it is sure that whoever devises evil against me will receive retribution according to his merits.

<p>The sect of the Sewras exists in most of the cities of India, but is especially numerous in Gujarat. As the Banyans are the chief traders there, consequently the Sewras also are plentiful. Besides making idol-temples for them, they have built houses for them to dwell in and to worship in. In fact, these houses are the headquarters of sedition. The Banyans send their wives and daughters to the Sewras, who have no shame or modesty. All kinds of strife and audacity are perpetrated by them. I therefore ordered that the Sewras should be expelled, and I circulated farmans to the effect that wherever there were Sewras in my empire they should be turned out.

<pb id=pb439 n=439><p>On Wednesday, the 10th, I went out to hunt, and shot two nilgaw, one male and one female. On this day the son of Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n came from Pattan, which was his father&apos;s fief, and paid his respects. He presented a Kachh&imacr; horse. It was a very handsome animal, and pleasant to ride. Till I came to Gujarat no one had presented me with so fine a horse. Its value was 1,000 rupees.

<p>On Thursday, the 11th, I had a wine party on the bank of the tank, and bestowed many favours on those servants who had been appointed to the province, and then dismissed them. Among the promotions was that of &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the Arab, to the rank of 2,500 personal and 2,000 horse. I also gave him drums, a horse, and a robe of honour. Himmat &Khbarb;&amacr;n was raised to the rank of 1,500 with 800 horse, and had a robe of honour and an elephant. Kif&amacr;yat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was made Diwan of the province, received the rank of 1,200 with 300 horse. &Sdotb;af&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n bakhshi received a horse and a robe of honour. &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja &ayin;&Amacr;qil had the rank of 1,500 with 650 horse, and was made bakhshi of the Ahadis, and had the title of &ayin;&Amacr;qil &Khbarb;&amacr;n. Thirty thousand darbs were given to the wakil of Qu&tumlb;bu-l-Mulk, who had brought the tribute.

<p>On this day my son &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n presented pomegranates and quinces that had been sent to him from Far&amacr;h. I had never seen such large ones, and I ordered them to be weighed. The quince weighed 29 tolas 9 mashas and the pomegranate 40&frac12; tolas. On Friday, the 12th, I went a-hunting and shot two nilgaw, a male and a female. On Saturday, the 13th, I shot three nilgaw, two males and one female. On Sunday, the 14th, I gave &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Ism&amacr;&ayin;&imacr;l, the son of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Ghbarb;au&sumlb;, a robe of honour and 500 rupees. On Monday, the 15th, I went a-hunting and shot two female nilgaw. On Tuesday, the 16th, I again presented the Shaikhs of Gujarat, who were in attendance, with robes of honour and maintenance-lands. To each of them I gave a book from my special <pb id=pb440 n=440>library, such as the Tafs&imacr;r-i-ka&shbarb;&shbarb;&amacr;f,<note n=1>Perhaps an explanation of Zama&khbarb;&shbarb;ari&apos;s Commentary.</note> the Tafs&imacr;r-i-&Hdotb;usain&imacr;,<note n=2>A Persian commentary on the Koran (Rieu, p. 96).</note> and the Rau&zdotb;atu-l-a&hdotb;b&amacr;b.<note n=3>A life of Muhammad (Rieu, i, 147).</note> I wrote on the back of the books the day of my arrival in Gujarat and the day of presentation of the books.

<p>At the time that Ahmadabad was adorned by the setting up of the royal standards my employment by day and by night was the seeing of necessitous persons and the bestowing on them of money and land. I directed &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; A&hdotb;mad the &Sdotb;adr and some other tactful servants to bring before me dervishes and other needy persons. I also directed the sons of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Muhammad &Ghbarb;au&sumlb;, the grandson of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Waj&imacr;hu-d-d&imacr;n, and other leading Shaikhs to produce whatever persons they believed to be in want. Similarly I appointed some women to do the same thing in the harem. My sole endeavour was that as I a king had come to this country after many years, no single person should be excluded. God is my witness that I did not fall short in this task, and that I never took any rest from this duty. Although I have not been delighted with my visit to Ahmadabad, yet I have this satisfaction&mdash;that my coming has been the cause of benefit to a large number of poor people.

<p>On Tuesday, the 16th, they caught Kaukab, the son of Qamar &Khbarb;&amacr;n. He had in Burhanpur put on a faqir&apos;s dress and gone off into the wilds. The brief account of his case is this:&mdash;He was the grandson of M&imacr;r &ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f, who was one of the Saif&imacr; Sayyids and was attached to this Court. Kaukab had been appointed to the Deccan army, and had spent some days with it in poverty and wretchedness. When for a long time he did not get promotion he suspected that I was unfavourable to him, and foolishly took the dress of asceticism and went off to the wilderness. In the course of six months he <pb id=pb441 n=441>traversed the whole of the Deccan, including Daulatabad, Bidar, Bijapur, the Carnatic, and Golconda, and came to the port of D&amacr;bul.<note n=1>D&amacr;bhol (I.G., new ed., xi, 100).</note> From there he came by ship to the port of Gog&amacr;, and after visiting the ports of Surat, Bro&amacr;ch, etc., he reached Ahmadabad. At this time Z&amacr;hid, a servant of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, arrested him and brought him to Court. I ordered them to bring him before me heavily bound. When I saw him I said to him, &ldquo;Considering the obligations of service of your father and grandfather, and your position as a houseborn one, why have you behaved in such an inauspicious manner?&rdquo; He replied that he could not tell a lie in the presence of his <hi>qibla</hi> and real teacher, and that the truth was that he had hoped for favours, but as he was unlucky he had left outward ties and gone into the wilderness of exile. As his words bore the marks of truth they made an impression on me, and I abandoned my harsh tone and asked him if in his misfortunes he had waited upon &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, or Qu&tumlb;bu-l-Mulk, or &ayin;Ambar. He replied that though he had been unsuccessful at this Court and had remained thirsty in this boundless ocean of beneficence, he had never&mdash;God forbid that he should&mdash;approached with his lips other fountains. Might his head be cut off if it had bowed at this Court and then lowered itself at another! From the time that he went into exile he had kept a diary showing what he had done, and by examining it it would be seen how he had conducted himself. These words of his increased my compassion for him, and I sent for his papers and read them. It appeared from them that he had encountered great hardship, and that he had spent much time on foot, and that he had suffered from want of food. On this account I felt kindly disposed towards him. Next day I sent for him and ordered them to remove the bonds from his arms and legs, and gave him a robe of honour, a horse, <pb id=pb442 n=442>and 1,000 rupees for his expenses. I also increased his rank by one half, and showed him such kindness as he never had imagined. He repeated this verse&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;What I see, is it, O God, waking or in a trance?
    <l>Do I behold myself in such comfort after such torture?&rdquo;
</lg>


<p>On Wednesday, the 17th, I marched 6 kos and halted at the village of B&amacr;ras&imacr;nor (B&amacr;las&imacr;nor). It has already been mentioned that the plague had appeared in Kashmir. On this day a report of the chronicler of events arrived, stating that the plague had taken firm hold of the country and that many had died. The symptoms were that the first day there was headache and fever and much bleeding at the nose. On the second day the patient died. In the house where one person died all the inmates were carried off. Whoever went near the sick person or a dead body was affected in the same way. In one instance the dead body was thrown on the grass, and it chanced that a cow came and ate some of the grass. It died, and some dogs that had eaten its flesh also all died. Things had come to such a pass that from fear of death fathers would not approach their children, and children would not go near their fathers. A strange thing was that in the ward in which the disease began, a fire broke out and nearly 3,000 houses were burnt. During the height of the plague, one morning when the people of the city and environs got up, they saw circles on their doors. There were three large circles, and on the face of these (i.e. inside them) there were two circles of middle size and one small one. There were also other circles which did not contain any whiteness<note n=1><hi>Biy&amacr;&zdotb;.</hi> The meaning is not clear. Perhaps what is meant is that there was no writing, only the circles.</note> (i.e. there were no inner circles). These figures were found on all the houses and even on the mosques. From the day when the fire took place and these circles appeared, they say there was a diminution of the plague. This has been <pb id=pb443 n=443>recorded as it seems a strange affair. It certainly does not agree with the canons of reason, and my intellect cannot accept it. Wisdom is with God! I trust that the Almighty will have mercy on his sinful slaves, and that they will be altogether freed from such calamity.

<p>On Thursday, the 18th, I marched 2&frac12; kos and halted on the bank of the Mah&imacr;. On this day the J&amacr;m zamindar<note n=1>Elliot, vi, 356.</note> had the good fortune to kiss the ground. He presented 50 horses, 100 muhrs, and 100 rupees. His name is Jass&amacr;, and J&amacr;m is his title. Whoever succeeds is called J&amacr;m. He is one of the chief zamindars of Gujarat, and, indeed, he is one of the noted rajas of India. His country is close to the sea. He always maintains 5,000 or 6,000 horse, and in time of war can supply as many as 10,000 or 12,000. There are many horses in his country; Kachh&imacr; horses fetch as much as 2,000 rupees. I gave him a dress of honour.

<p>On the same day Lachm&imacr; Nar&amacr;yan, Raja of K&umacr;ch (Bih&amacr;r), which adjoins Bengal, did homage and presented 500 muhrs. He received a dress of honour and an ornamented dagger.

<p>Naw&amacr;zish &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Sa&ayin;&imacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who had been appointed to J&umacr;naga&rdotb;h, had the good fortune to pay his respects. On Friday, the 19th, I halted, and on Saturday, the 20th, I marched 3&frac34; kos and halted at the tank of Jhan&umacr;d. On Sunday I marched 4&frac12; kos and halted at the tank of Badarw&amacr;l&amacr;. On this day there came the news of the death of &ayin;A&zumlb;amat &Khbarb;&amacr;n Gujar&amacr;t&imacr;. On account of illness he had remained in Ahmadabad. He was a servant who knew one&apos;s disposition, and did good work. As he had thorough knowledge of the Deccan and Gujarat, I was grieved at his death. In the tank above mentioned I noticed a plant which at the approach of the finger or the end of a stick contracts its leaves. After a while it opens them out again. Its leaves resemble those of <pb id=pb444 n=444>the tamarind, and it is called in Arabic <hi>&Shbarb;ajaru-l-&hdotb;ay&amacr;</hi>, &lsquo;the plant of modesty.&rsquo; In Hind&imacr; it is called <hi>Lajvant&imacr;</hi>. <hi>L&amacr;j</hi> means modesty. It is certainly not void of strangeness. They also call it <hi>na&ghbarb;zak</hi>, and say that it also grows on dry land.

<p>On Monday, the 22nd, I halted. My scouts reported that there was a tiger in the neighbourhood which vexed wayfarers, and in the forest where it was they had seen a skull and some bones lying. After midday I went out to shoot it, and killed it with one discharge. Though it was a large tiger, I had killed several that were larger. Among them was a tiger which I killed in the fort of M&amacr;nd&umacr;, and which was 8&frac12; maunds. This one weighed 7&frac12; maunds, or 1 maund less.

<p>On Tuesday, the 23rd, I marched over 3&frac12; kos and alighted on the bank of the River B&amacr;yab.<note n=1>MSS. seem to have M&amacr;n&imacr;b.</note> On Wednesday I marched nearly 6 kos and halted at the tank of Hamda.<note n=2>MSS. seem to have N&imacr;mda.</note> On Thursday I ordered a halt and had a wine party, and gave cups to my special servants. I promoted Naw&amacr;zish &Khbarb;&amacr;n to the rank of 3,000 with 2,000 horse, which was an increase of 500 personal, and gave him a robe of honour and an elephant, and allowed him to go to his fief. Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain Sabzak,<note n=3>The MSS. have Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain Saud&amacr;gar (trader).</note> who had been sent to Balkh to buy horses, came to Court to-day and paid his respects. Of the horses he brought, one was piebald and was of fine shape and colour. I had never seen a piebald horse of this colour before. He had also brought other good roadsters. I therefore gave him the title of Tij&amacr;rat&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>On Friday, the 26th, I marched 5&frac14; kos and halted at the village of J&amacr;lod.<note n=4>The Jhallod of Bayley&apos;s map.</note> R&amacr;ja Lachm&imacr; Nar&amacr;yan, the paternal uncle of the Raja of K&umacr;ch, to whom I had now given the territory of K&umacr;ch, was presented with a horse. On <pb id=pb445 n=445>Saturday I marched 3 kos and halted at Boda.<note n=1>MSS. have Ran&umacr;d.</note> On Sunday I marched 5 kos and set up the royal standards at Do&hdotb;ad. It is on the borders of Malwa and Gujarat.

<p>Pahluw&amacr;n Bah&amacr;&hamza;u-d-d&imacr;n, the musketeer, brought a young monkey (<hi>lang&umacr;r</hi>) with a goat, and represented that on the road one of his marksmen had seen the female langur with a young one in its arms on a tree. The cruel man had shot the mother, which on being struck had left the young one on a branch, and had herself dropped on the ground and died. Pahluw&amacr;n Bah&amacr;&hamza;u-d-d&imacr;n had then come up and taken down the young one, and had put it beside the goat to be suckled. God had inspired the goat with affection for it, and it began to lick the monkey and to fondle it. In spite of difference of species she showed such love as if it had come out of her own womb. I told them to separate them, but the goat immediately began to lament, and the young langur also became much distressed. The affection of the monkey is not so remarkable, as it wanted to get milk, but the affection of the goat for it is remarkable. The langur is an animal belonging to the monkey tribe. But the hair of the monkey (<hi>maim&umacr;n</hi>) is yellowish and its face is red, while the hair of the langur is white and its face is black. Its tail, too, is twice as long as the maimun&apos;s. I have written these things on account of their strangeness. On Monday, the 29th, I halted and went to hunt nilgaw. I shot two, one male and one female. On Tuesday also, the 30th, I halted.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p>End of the twelfth year of the Emperor&apos;s reign, in the T&umacr;zuk-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;.





<pb id=pb447 n=447>
</body>
<back id=backmatter>
<div1 type=Errata id=errata>
<head>Errata and Addenda.</head>


<p>Page <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>, line 7 from foot. The figure 1 should be placed at Sul&tumlb;&amacr;nu-n-nis&amacr; Begam.

<p>p. <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>, l. 5. <hi>For</hi> my <hi>read</hi> his. With reference to n. 2, p. 120, l. 13, shows that the father meant is &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;.

<p>p. <ref target=pb34 type=pageref>34</ref>, l. 2 of verse. Solomon&apos;s greatness depended on the possession of a ring. When that was lost his power departed. See the story of its loss and recovery in M&imacr;r &Khbarb;w&amacr;nd (Rehatsek&apos;s translation, pt. i, 100). Probably then the line should be rendered &lsquo;Call him the ring-wearing Solomon.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>, near foot. The words &lsquo;the news,&rsquo; etc., are not a verse, and Na&zumlb;ar-j&imacr;v&imacr; should be Na&zumlb;ar Ch&umacr;l&imacr;, i.e. the Na&zumlb;ar who accompanied Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n through the desert (<hi>ch&umacr;l</hi>). See Akbar-n&amacr;ma translation, i, 657, n. 3.

<p>p. <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>, l. 2. <hi>For</hi> near Lahore <hi>read</hi> a dependency of Lahore. Kal&amacr;n&umacr;r is the Kalanaur of the maps, and is 15 miles west of Gurd&amacr;sp&umacr;r (I.G., new ed., xiv, 297).

<p>p. <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, note. <hi>For</hi> lithograph <hi>read</hi> text.

<p>p. <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>, l. 8. <hi>For</hi> M&imacr;rz&amacr; <hi>read</hi> M&imacr;r&amacr;n.

<p>p. <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>, l. 1, and note 1. I.O. MSS. seem to have Tanam Bah&amacr;dur. The reference to Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr; is ii, 140. The name of Mu&zumlb;affar Gujar&amacr;t&imacr;&apos;s son was Bah&amacr;dur.

<p>p. <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>, n. 1. <hi>For</hi> Price, p. 6 <hi>read</hi> Price, p. 68. The Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma and Khul&amacr;&sumlb;atu-t-taw&amacr;r&imacr;&khbarb; say he was put in charge of Ihtim&amacr;m Kotw&amacr;l.

<p>p. <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>, n. 2. It is N&imacr;lera in I.O. MS. No. 181.

<p>p. <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>, l. 6. The meaning is that &ayin;&Amacr;bid&imacr;n was the son of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s spiritual adviser. &ayin;&Amacr;bid&imacr;n is called &ayin;&Amacr;bid&imacr; in Akbar-n&amacr;ma, iii, 832. He came to India in 1013 (1604&ndash;5), and Akbar gave him the rank of 1,000 and 500 horse (iii, 834).

<p>p. <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>, l. 11. <hi>For</hi> know <hi>read</hi> knew.

<p>p. <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, l. 7. The MSS. seem to have Jaih&amacr;l.

<p>p. <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, last line. Kil&imacr;n means &lsquo;daughter-in-law&rsquo; in Turk&imacr;. Perhaps K&imacr;lan here is a synonym for &lsquo;son-in-law.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>, l. 8. The words &lsquo;which in Hindustani is called <hi>ball&imacr;&rsquo;</hi> are not in the I.O. MSS. I do not know the word <hi>ball&imacr;</hi> as meaning a pole. Perhaps it is a mistake for <hi>lagg&imacr;</hi>.

<p>p. <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, l. 3 from foot. Omit the words &lsquo;who is one of the &khbarb;&amacr;naz&amacr;das of the State.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb79 type=pageref>79</ref>, l. 6. <hi>For</hi> and cash <hi>read</hi> in cash.

<p>p. <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>, n. 1. Delete question mark and the words &lsquo;near Mult&amacr;n.&rsquo; Nandanpur, i.e. Nandana (I.G., xviii, 349), and Girjh&amacr;k are in the Jhelam district. The R&amacr;m D&amacr;s garden was some place near Lahore, where Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r took up his residence on the way to the hunting-ground. He spent 3&frac12; months in hunting.

<p>p. <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>, l. 19. <hi>For</hi> &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m, <hi>read</hi> &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;m&amacr;n.

<pb id=pb448 n=448><p>p. <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, l. 21. Firi&shbarb;ta in his account of B&amacr;bar says the Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n of that time was descended from the Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n who in 816 <hi rend=sc>A.H.</hi> (1413&ndash;14) was Sultan of Delhi. See Elliot, iv, 45.

<p>p. <ref target=pb90 type=pageref>90</ref>, l. 4 from foot. Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;rp&umacr;r is mentioned in account of 15th year, p. 317, last line (text). It is the &Shbarb;e&khbarb;opura of the maps, and is 22 miles from &Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb;&amacr;b&amacr;d and 18 miles west of Lahore. It was called &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;&umacr;p&umacr;ra in allusion to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s pet name of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;&umacr; B&amacr;b&amacr;, and also in honour of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Sal&imacr;m. See &Khbarb;ul&amacr;&sdotb;a T. in account of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s reign. The I.G., xxii, 270, wrongly ascribes its origin to D&amacr;r&amacr; &Shbarb;uk&umacr;h. Mull&amacr; &Hdotb;usain Kashm&imacr;r&imacr;, mentioned on p. 91, died in 1037 (1627&ndash;8), Rieu, ii, 7756. The minaret is still standing. See Eastwick&apos;s &ldquo;Panjab Handbook,&rdquo; 200. Instead of &lsquo;the gravestone in the shape of an antelope&rsquo; we should render, I think, &lsquo;a stone tomb with the figure of an antelope (engraved upon it).&rsquo; The I. O. MSS. have Marr&amacr;j as the name of the antelope. Perhaps we should read Manor&amacr;j &lsquo;mind&apos;s lord.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>, l. 3 from foot. I. O. MSS, have <hi>bah&umacr;r</hi> <AR>b-hUr</AR> as the name of the net.

<p>p. <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>, n. 1. Delete note. The <hi>rang</hi> is the ibex.

<p>p. <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, n. 1. See J.A.S.B. for February, 1908, p. 39.

<p>p. <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref>. The Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma mentions in connection with the story of the mummified saint that many Sabzaw&amacr;r saints lived in B&amacr;miy&amacr;n. See also K&amacr;mg&amacr;r &Hdotb;usain&imacr;.

<p>p. <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>, l. 1. Delete word &lsquo;Georgians.&rsquo; I. O. MS. No. 181 has &ghbarb;urja.

<p>p. <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, l. 10. Insert &lsquo;and&rsquo; after &lsquo;sheep.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>, l. 13. <hi>For</hi> garden <hi>read</hi> gardens.

<p>p. <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>, l. 4. <hi>For</hi> £ <hi>read</hi> rupees.

<p>p. <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>, l. 15. <hi>For</hi> he died on the 29th <hi>read</hi> he died in his ninth decade (i.e. between 80 and 90). The Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, ii, 143, says he was 82 when he died.

<p>p. <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>, l. 13 from foot. Instead of &lsquo;he went off alone&rsquo; the MSS. have &lsquo;carrying off his life&rsquo; (i.e. escaping) with difficulty.

<p>p. <ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref>, n. 1. The opinion expressed in this note is proved to be wrong by General Cunningham&apos;s Report, Arch. S., xiv, p. 58. The tombs are those of a musician and his pupil.

<p>p. <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>, l. 8. Delete <hi>Sylvia olivacea</hi>.

<p>p. <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>, l. 7. Apparently there were twelve balls, or at least objects, ten being as large as an orange, another being a citron, and the twelfth a <hi>sur&khbarb;</hi>. So instead of &lsquo;one to a citron&rsquo; we should read, perhaps, &lsquo;a citron and a <hi>sur&kbarb;h</hi>.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>, l. 3 from foot. <hi>For</hi> Ilf <hi>read</hi> Alf.

<p>p. <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>, l. 4 from foot. Delete the word &lsquo;Egyptian&rsquo; and also n. 1. It appears from the &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-l-lo&ghbarb;&amacr;t that a Qu&tumlb;b&imacr; ruby is a broad ruby suitable for a ring (signet?).

<p>p. <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>, l. 13 from foot. <hi>For</hi> Hama&zbarb;&amacr;n&imacr; <hi>read</hi> Hamad&amacr;n&imacr;.

<p>p. <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>. According to Terry, Jah&amacr;nd&amacr;r was called Sultan Ta&khbarb;t because born when Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r first sat on his throne.

<p>p. <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>, l. 9. Perhaps Y&umacr;z&imacr; = Y&umacr;z-b&amacr;sh&imacr;, i.e. centurion. But I. O. 181 has not the word, only saying &lsquo;&Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n,&rsquo; and No. 305 has &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n B&umacr;r&imacr;(?).

<p>p. <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>, l. 10. The passage is wrongly translated. No elephant was <pb id=pb449 n=449>presented to Sal&amacr;mu-llah. The sentence should end on l. 9 after the word &lsquo;panther-keeper,&rsquo; which word is probably a mistranslation. Then this new sentence should come, i.e. &lsquo;Sal&amacr;mu-llah &ayin;Arab, who is a young man of a distinguished Arabian family (<hi>kih az jaw&amacr;n&amacr;n-i-qar&amacr;r-d&amacr;da-i-&ayin;Arab ast</hi>) and related to Mub&amacr;rak, the governor of Dizf&umacr;l, came to wait upon me on account of his being suspicious of the designs of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s (against himself).&rsquo; &lsquo;I patronized him,&rsquo; etc. (as on p. 158).

<p>p. <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>, n. 3, and p. 162, n. 1. Both notes are wrong. The place meant by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r is Dizf&umacr;l, a town in the &Khbarb;&umacr;zist&amacr;n province of Persia, and J&umacr;yza is evidently a copyist&apos;s error for &Khbarb;&umacr;z or &Khbarb;&umacr;za, another name for &Khbarb;&umacr;zist&amacr;n. Dizf&umacr;l is an ancient name, and according to Y&amacr;q&umacr;t, Barbier de Meynard&apos;s translation, p. 231, the proper spelling is Dizp&umacr;l, i.e. &lsquo;the Bridge of the Citadel,&rsquo; the town being named after a famous bridge built over the river. For &Khbarb;&umacr;z see B. de Meynard, 216.

<p>p. <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, l. 12 from foot. Qab&umacr;lah was a town in the Bet J&amacr;landhar D&umacr;&hamza;&amacr;b.

<p>p. <ref target=pb163 type=pageref>163</ref>, l. 9. It is 2,000 rupees in I. O. MSS.

<p>p. <ref target=pb163 type=pageref>163</ref>, l. 12. It is not Q&amacr;ch&amacr; Dakhan&imacr; in I. O. MSS., but I am not sure what the clause, as given by them, means. No. 181 seems to have <hi>bafat&amacr;h&amacr;&imacr;g&imacr;</hi> for &lsquo;assistance&rsquo; (?). Two B. M. MSS. have apparently <hi>bafat&amacr;h&amacr;&imacr; kap&imacr;</hi>, but Add. 26,215 has the Arabic <hi>&hdotb;a</hi>, while Or. 3276 has the ordinary <hi>h</hi>, so that the words possibly mean &lsquo;the young of the monkey&rsquo; (<hi>kap&imacr;</hi>).

<p>p. <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, l. 2. &Hdotb;us&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n was married to Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l&apos;s sister, Blochmann, 441.

<p>p. <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>, l. 16. The word <hi>rojh</hi> in brackets is wrong. The MSS. have <hi>qara-quyra&ghbarb;</hi> and <hi>qar&amacr;-quyr&amacr;&ghbarb;</hi>. P. de Courteille gives <hi>quyr&umacr;&ghbarb;</hi> as meaning a tail, so perhaps <hi>qar&amacr;-q&umacr;yr&umacr;&ghbarb;</hi> means a black-tailed sheep or deer. See p. 129, l. 17, where the <hi>qar&amacr;-q&umacr;yr&umacr;&ghbarb;</hi> is said to be the <hi>chik&amacr;ra</hi>.

<p>p. <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>, last line. The MSS. has <hi>&hdotb;abs-i-maz&imacr;d</hi>, which does not necessarily mean imprisonment for life.

<p>p. <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>, n. 2. <hi>For</hi> Akbar&apos;s wives <hi>read</hi> Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s wives.

<p>p. <ref target=pb172 type=pageref>172</ref>, l. 21 seq. Is this the story referred to by Hawkins (Purchas), about Muqarrab having taken a Banian&apos;s daughter?

<p>p. <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>, note. <hi>For</hi> one-third of an inch <hi>read</hi> one and a third inches.

<p>p. <ref target=pb183 type=pageref>183</ref>, l. 8. This is the annular eclipse entered in Dr. R. Schramm&apos;s Tables, Sewell&apos;s Indian Calendar, as having occurred on 5th December, 1610, which corresponds to 28th Rama&zdotb;&amacr;n, 1019.

<p>p. <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, n. 3. Persian text, p. 309, l. 11, has the phrase <hi>majr&amacr; girifta &amacr;ta&shbarb; d&amacr;dand</hi>, &lsquo;took aim and fired&rsquo; (a cannon).

<p>p. <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>, l. 7 from foot. For Na&zumlb;&imacr;r&imacr;, see Rieu, ii, 807<hi>b</hi>, and Blochmann, 579. He died in 1622 (1613).

<p>p. <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, l. 10. <hi>For dh&imacr;k</hi> (?) <hi>read dh&imacr;k</hi>, i.e. adjutant bird.

<p>p. <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, l. 8. <hi>P&amacr;tal</hi> means &lsquo;red&rsquo; or &lsquo;rose-coloured&rsquo; in Sanskrit. Query &lsquo;red deer.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, l. 2. Add year 1020.

<p>p. <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>, last line. The passage is rather obscure, but the meaning seems to be that though formalities are not regarded by the wise, yet weak persons (<hi>q&amacr;w&amacr;sir</hi>, which apparently is a plural of <hi>q&amacr;&sdotb;ir</hi>), regard <pb id=pb450 n=450>externals as the means of paying the dues of friendship (and so we must attend to them). Hence when at this auspicious time a province which had gone out of my (&ayin;Abb&amacr;s&apos;s) possession has been settled by the exertions of angelic servants in accordance with the hopes of well-wishers, I (&ayin;Abb&amacr;s) have returned to the capital, and have despatched Kam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n, etc.

<p>p. <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>, l. 7. <hi>For</hi> Khankh&amacr;n&amacr;n <hi>read</hi> &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>p. <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>, l. 12. The I.O. MSS. have a different reading here. They say nothing about three ratis. What they say is, &ldquo;At this time I had made some increase in the amounts of weights and measures. For instance, I added one-fourth (<hi>siw&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;</hi>) to the weight of the muhrs and rupees.&rdquo; The <hi>sih rat&imacr;</hi> of text is a mistake for <hi>siw&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;</hi>.

<p>p. <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>, l. 12 from foot. I.O. MSS. have &lsquo;Sunday in &Sdotb;afar,&rsquo; but they wrongly have 1022.

<p>p. <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>, l. 9 from foot. Both I.O. MSS. have &lsquo;Neknahar&rsquo; instead of &lsquo;in the interior.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb198 type=pageref>198</ref>, l. 11. <hi>Or</hi> Lohgar.

<p>p. <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref>, l. 14. I do not think that the translation &lsquo;should not force Islam on anyone,&rsquo; or the version in Elliot, vi, 325, &lsquo;Not to forcibly impose Musulman burdens on anyone,&rsquo; gives the full force of the words <hi>takl&imacr;f-i-Musalm&amacr;n&imacr; bar kas&imacr; nakunand</hi>. I think the reference clearly is to circumcision, and that the words <hi>takl&imacr;f-i-Musalm&amacr;n&imacr;</hi> should be rendered &lsquo;the Muhammadan ceremonial.&rsquo; This explains why the injunction comes in immediately after the prohibitions against blinding and mutilation. It has been said, and I believe with truth, that the members of the Delhi royal family never were circumcised. Probably one reason for this was that in many instances they had Hindu mothers. As pointed out in Elliot, the passage is omitted in the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma. It also does not occur in the version given in &ayin;Al&imacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad&apos;s &ldquo;History of Gujarat,&rdquo; vol. i, p. 200 of lithograph.

<p>p. <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, verse. <hi>For</hi> red <hi>read</hi> a river.

<p>p. <ref target=pb216 type=pageref>216</ref>. See picture of a turkey in Havell&apos;s &ldquo;Indian Sculpture,&rdquo; pp. 214&ndash;15.

<p>p. <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>, l. 10 from foot. About &Shbarb;&amacr;p&umacr;r see Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, i, 180.

<p>p. <ref target=pb224 type=pageref>224</ref>, n. 1. <hi>For</hi> infra <hi>read</hi> supra, pp. 27 and 30, note.

<p>p. <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, ll. 9 and 14. <hi>For</hi> Patna <hi>read</hi> Tatta.

<p>p. <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, note. <hi>For</hi> brother <hi>read</hi> brother&apos;s son.

<p>p. <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>, l. 14 from foot. <hi>For</hi> Nih&amacr;lp&umacr;r <hi>substitute</hi> Th&amacr;lner as in the MSS. The news of the death seems to have reached Agra very quickly.

<p>p. <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, l. 1. Insert the word &lsquo;and&rsquo; before &lsquo;allowed.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, l. 2 from foot. The word translated &lsquo;cranes&rsquo; is <hi>k&amacr;rw&amacr;nak</hi>, and probably means &lsquo;a little crane.&rsquo; In Blochmann, 63, <hi>karw&amacr;nak</hi> is rendered by &lsquo;stone-curlew.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, l. 5 from foot. The word seems to be <hi>kunji&shbarb;k</hi>, &lsquo;sparrow,&rsquo; in the MSS., but probably it should be <hi>kunjak</hi>, &lsquo;a curiosity, a rarity.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>, l. 2. It is Thursday, the 28th, in the MSS., and instead of &lsquo;night&rsquo; we should <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;eve.&rsquo; The English date corresponding to 28th Mu&hdotb;arram is 10th March, 1613.

<p>p. <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>, l. 8. It is 1,000 in the MSS., and this is probably correct, though B.M. MS. 1645 has changed the word for 1,000 into one for 100. <pb id=pb451 n=451>The ordinary <hi>kaukab-i-&tumlb;&amacr;li&ayin;</hi> was 100 tolas in weight, see p. 11. At p. 406 two kaukab-i-tali&apos;s are mentioned of 500 tolas each. It is a mistake, I think, to regard the word muhr as always implying gold. The ordinary kaukab-i-tali&ayin; was of silver, and these large muhrs were no doubt also of silver. The note 1 to Elliott, vi, 355, is probably incorrect.

<p>p. <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>, l. 10. &lsquo;The feast went off well,&rsquo; etc. The passage is obscure, but probably the translation should be &lsquo;There was a splendid assemblage (<hi>majis &shbarb;igufta ga&shbarb;t</hi>), and after it was over I ordered that they should arrange an illumination.&rsquo; The words in text, p. 116, l. 3, are <hi>&hdotb;ukm kardam kih asb&amacr;b u &amacr;y&imacr;n b&amacr;r kunand</hi>. The MSS. have <hi>asb&amacr;b-i-&amacr;y&imacr;n r&amacr;</hi>. No. 181 seems to have <hi>b&amacr;z kunand</hi>, and so has B.M. MS. 1645, but No. 305 has <hi>b&amacr;r kunand</hi>, as in text. It may be that the meaning is that Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r told the servants they might appropriate the decorations, but I rather think the order was to make an illumination. It may also simply mean that he ordered the decorations to be taken down. <hi>B&amacr;z kunand</hi> ordinarily means &lsquo;to open out,&rsquo; <hi>b&amacr;r kunand</hi> &lsquo;to load.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>, l. 12. Delete &lsquo;the&rsquo; before Muqarrab.

<p>p. <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>, note. I.O. MSS. seem to have <hi>zar&imacr;n</hi>, &lsquo;golden&rsquo;(?).

<p>p. <ref target=pb241 type=pageref>241</ref>, l. 5 from foot. I.G., new ed., xvii, 309, speaks of a handsome mosque in Mairtha having been founded by Akbar, but probably it is this one of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; P&imacr;r. Perhaps &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; P&imacr;r is the old beggar referred to in Roe&apos;s Journal.

<p>p. <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, l. 5 from foot. For <hi>chakr&imacr;</hi> read <hi>jhakka&rdotb;</hi>. It was not necessarily a dust-storm.

<p>p. <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>, l. 6. The MSS. have R&umacr;p instead of R&amacr;wal, and so has Elliot, vi, 335. They have &lsquo;hill country of Mew&amacr;t,&rsquo; as in text. They have Chitor, and not Jaip&umacr;r, as in Elliot, and they make (by error) Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r speak of the year as the 10th, instead of the 8th. Instead of &lsquo;have&rsquo; at l. 12 we should read &lsquo;had,&rsquo; and instead of &lsquo;from the R&amacr;wal who was first known as R&amacr;wal,&rsquo; they have, as also has Elliot, &lsquo;Rahab, who was the first to take the title of R&amacr;n&amacr;.&rsquo; Rahab is the Rahup of Tod, who says he came to the throne in 1201 <hi rend=sc>A.D.</hi>

<p>p. <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>, ll. 10 and 11. I cannot find the word <hi>p&umacr;lta-b&amacr;z&imacr;</hi>. My friend, Mr. Irvine, suggests that we should read <hi>pa&tdotb;&tdotb;&amacr; b&amacr;z&imacr;</hi>. <hi>Pa&tdotb;&tdotb;&amacr;</hi> means a &lsquo;foil,&rsquo; or &lsquo;wooden sword,&rsquo; and <hi>pa&tdotb;&tdotb;&amacr; b&amacr;z</hi> is given in Forbes as meaning a &lsquo;fencer.&rsquo; <hi>Paltha m&amacr;rn&amacr;</hi> occurs in Forbes as meaning a &lsquo;peculiar posture.&rsquo; The <hi>yag&amacr;nag&imacr;</hi> of l. 11 should be <hi>yak&amacr;ngagi</hi>, meaning &lsquo;one body,&rsquo; or &lsquo;one limb,&rsquo; and corresponds to the <hi>yakh&amacr;th</hi> of Blochmann, 252, both phrases meaning apparently &lsquo;that the fencer fights with one hand,&rsquo; that is, &lsquo;without using a shield.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>, l. 8. This I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d is the father of Mumt&amacr;z-ma&hdotb;all, the wife of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n. He now became &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and apparently the title of I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d was transferred to his younger brother (or cousin?) &Shbarb;&amacr;hp&umacr;r, who was afterwards governor of Kashmir. See Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir<corr>,</corr> i, 180. The two previous &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;ns of the family are &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n of Qazw&imacr;n (Blochmann, 433), and M&imacr;rz&amacr; Ja&ayin;far Beg, who was &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n&apos;s nephew. The father of N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n was &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb; Beg of T&imacr;hran (Blochmann, 508). Blochmann, in his Table, 512, has not mentioned &Shbarb;&amacr;hp&umacr;r, i.e. the I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d who became governor of Kashmir.

<pb id=pb452 n=452><p>p. <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>, l. 17 from foot. <hi>For</hi> mother <hi>read</hi> mothers (i.e. stepmothers).

<p>p. <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>, l. 10 from foot. <hi>For</hi> nephews <hi>read</hi> nephew.

<p>p. <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, l. 13. <hi>For</hi> named <hi>read</hi> <hi>namad</hi>, and it should be in italics.

<p>p. <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, l. 2. The permission to beat his drums is explained by the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, p. 79, where it is said that he was permitted to beat his drums in the capital, <hi>dar p&amacr;y-i-ta&khbarb;t</hi>.

<p>p. <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, l. 6 from foot. This eclipse is noted in Dr. Schram&apos;s Tables as occurring on 19th March, 1615.

<p>p. <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, l. 10 from foot. Delete word &lsquo;Egyptian.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb286 type=pageref>286</ref>, l. 6. <hi>For</hi> Frank <hi>read</hi> Venetian. <hi>K&amacr;r-i-Wanadik</hi>, as in MSS.

<p>p. <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>, l. 5. Chat&umacr;r, instead of Ta&hdotb;ayyur, in No. 305, and Ba&khbarb;tar (?) in No. 181.

<p>p. <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>. According to the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, 80, Kunwar Karan, son of R&amacr;n&amacr; Amar Singh, became an officer of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, receiving the rank of 5,000 personal and horse. He was the first of the direct royal line of his family to accept office.

<p>p. <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>, l. 2 from foot. No. 181 has 102 horses.

<p>p. <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>, n. 2. No. 181 has Ra&shbarb;t.

<p>p. <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>, l. 18. According to Vullers&apos; Dict., i, 482, a <hi>t&umacr;lcha</hi> is 96 grains or about half a tola. The &Ghbarb;&imacr;ya&sumlb;u-l-lo&ghbarb;&amacr;t, however, says that <hi>t&umacr;lcha</hi> is merely the Persian form of the Hindust&amacr;n&imacr; <hi>t&umacr;l&amacr;</hi>. According to the Burhan-i-q&amacr;ti&hamza; a tola is only 2&frac12; m&amacr;sha in Upper India. Generally it is reckoned as 12 m&amacr;sha. According to Sir Thomas Roe 2&frac12; tolas were equal to 1 ounce.

<p>p. <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>, MS. No. 181 has <hi rend=sc>A.H.</hi> date 1025.

<p>p. <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>, l. 11. <hi>For</hi> several bits <hi>read</hi> some marten skins. See T&umacr;zuk text, p. 308, l. 3 from foot, and Vullers&apos; Dict, ii, 6. The MS. No. 181 has <hi>&sdotb;ad d&amacr;na-i-k&imacr;sh</hi>, &lsquo;one hundred marten skins.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>, l. 13 from foot. <hi>For</hi> transit dues <hi>read</hi> for keeping open the Pass (<hi>r&amacr;h-d&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>).

<p>p. <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>, n. 2. The words in I.O. MSS. seem to be <hi>&imacr;g&amacr;na beg&amacr;na</hi>, which is perhaps a mere jingle on the word <hi>afgh&amacr;na</hi>, but may mean &lsquo;known, unknown.&rsquo; Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r puns on the name Qadam, which means &lsquo;a foot, a pace.&rsquo; The words occur again at p. 323.

<p>p. <ref target=pb322 type=pageref>322</ref>, last line. Probably <hi>&ayin;&amacr;qir&imacr;</hi> is, or is derived from, <hi>&ayin;aq&amacr;r</hi>, which means a bird whose feathers were used for ornamentation. According to P. de Courteille, Turk&imacr; Dict., 384, <hi>&ayin;aq&amacr;r</hi> is a heron.

<p>p. <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, l. 13 from foot. <hi>For</hi> &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at <hi>read</hi> &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Shbarb;uj&amacr;&ayin;. He was &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n&apos;s second son, and was born at Ajmir on the eve of Sunday, and on 11th T&imacr;r. Apparently this corresponds to 24th June, 1616, which is the date of birth mentioned by Sir Thomas Roe. Beale&apos;s date of 12th May is wrong.

<p>p. <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>, l. 6 from foot. Here the word <hi>t&umacr;lcha</hi> is used again, and apparently as meaning the same thing as <hi>tola</hi>; 6,514 t&umacr;lchas or tolas would be about 82 s&imacr;rs, or over 2 maunds and about 12 stone. Next year Sir Thomas Roe saw Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r weighed, and he understood that his weight was 9,000 rupees. If so, his weight would appear to have considerably increased during the twelve months. Perhaps we should read 8,514, instead of 6,514 t&umacr;lchas. <hi>Ha&shbarb;t</hi> (8) and <hi>&shbarb;a&shbarb;</hi> (6) are often confounded.

<pb id=pb453 n=453><p>p. <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, l. 8 from foot. <hi>For</hi> times <hi>read</hi> days, the word <hi>r&umacr;z</hi> (days) having been omitted from the text.

<p>p. <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, n. 1. Apparently we should <hi>read</hi> Toda. The difference between it and Nauda is, in Persian writing, only one dot. Toda is mentioned by Roe as the place where he overtook Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, and the stages given by him come to 21 kos, counting from R&amacr;msar, and this agrees very nearly with Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s stages from the same place.

<p>p. <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>, l. 15 from foot. The MS. No. 181 has the word <hi>gaz</hi> twice, and makes the <hi>pahn&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;</hi>, or width, 175&frac12; <hi>gaz</hi> (yards).

<p>p. <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>, last line. <hi>For</hi> B&umacr;lghar&imacr; <hi>read</hi> P&umacr;lkhar&imacr;.

<p>p. <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>, l. 1. Delete the words &lsquo;of T&imacr;r.&rsquo; The month was Bahman, corresponding to January-February, 1617, and 23rd Bahman would be about 1st February. In Sayyid A&hdotb;mad&apos;s edition the word <hi>T&imacr;r</hi> is a mistake for <hi>n&imacr;z</hi>, &lsquo;also,&rsquo; the meaning being that the 23rd was a halt as well as the 22nd.

<p>p. <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>, l. 2. &Ghbarb;azn&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n is mentioned by Finch under the name of Gidney &Khbarb;&amacr;n, and he is said to have been originally a Hindu. But this seems doubtful, as his father&apos;s name is given in the Mir&hamza;&amacr;t-i-A&hdotb;mad&imacr; as Malik &Khbarb;&amacr;nj&imacr; Af&ghbarb;&amacr;n. See also Bayley&apos;s &ldquo;Gujarat,&rdquo; p. 15. J&amacr;lor is now in Jodhp&umacr;r. It is described by Finch.

<p>p. <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>, l. 2. This seems to be the case of matricide mentioned in Terry&apos;s &ldquo;Voyage,&rdquo; p. 362, of ed. of 1777. His statement that it occurred at A&hdotb;madabad is presumably an oversight. Terry says the matricide was put to death by being bitten by two snakes. See also Irvine&apos;s &ldquo;Manucci,&rdquo; iv, 422. Apparently the punishment recorded by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r took place on the 4th February, for Sir Thomas Roe mentions that they reached K&amacr;liy&amacr;daha, the next stage, on 6th February. The <hi>bi</hi> in <hi>biy&amacr;sa</hi> should be deleted. J&amacr;laur, or Jalor, is in Jodhp&umacr;r (I.G., xiv, 29). It used to be in Ajmir. It is not quite clear if Terry was with Roe at K&amacr;liy&amacr;daha, but if not he was with him at Ujjain. The execution may have taken place there.

<p>p. <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>, l. 16. <hi>For</hi> &lsquo;from the city of Ujjain,&rsquo; etc., <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;to a rural spot near the city of Ujjain.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>, l. 22. <hi>For</hi> 128&frac14; cubits <hi>read</hi> 28&frac14; cubits. I.O. MS. 181 has 28&frac14; yards. The printed text of Sayyid A&hdotb;mad has 128&frac14; cubits.

<p>p. <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>, l. 8 from foot. Delete (B&amacr;lchha?).

<p>p. <ref target=pb373 type=pageref>373</ref>, l. 11 seq. This I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d was the younger brother or perhaps cousin of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the brother of N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n. He was also known as &Shbarb;&amacr;hp&umacr;r. See Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;iru-l-umar&amacr;, i, 180.

<p>p. <ref target=pb375 type=pageref>375</ref>, n. 2. <hi>Read</hi> two diamonds.

<p>p. <ref target=pb406 type=pageref>406</ref>, n. 3. D&imacr;&khbarb;t&amacr;n or Dai&khbarb;t&amacr;n seems right. It is so in both the I.O. MSS.

<p>p. <ref target=pb406 type=pageref>406</ref>, l. 11 from foot. These muhrs were probably of silver, and were called muhrs because they were medals rather than coins. Dr. Kehr has given an account of a large muhr which is now apparently in Dresden. See also Richardson&apos;s Dict., article Sikka.

<p>p. <ref target=pb407 type=pageref>407</ref>, l. 4. This is J&umacr;na &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n Tu&ghbarb;luq. He ascended the throne in 1325 under the title of Mu&hdotb;ammad bin Tu&ghbarb;luq.

<p>p. <ref target=pb407 type=pageref>407</ref>, l. 15. This is the prince known as Na&sdotb;&imacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n. He ascended the throne as Mu&hdotb;ammad bin F&imacr;r&umacr;z in 1387, and again in 1390.

<pb id=pb454 n=454><p>p. <ref target=pb413 type=pageref>413</ref>, ll. 11 and 3 from foot. I.O. MSS. show that Sar-far&amacr;z should be Sarafr&amacr;z; apparently his present was &lsquo;seven bullock-carts&rsquo; (<hi>haft r&amacr;s g&amacr;w bahal</hi>) and not two bullocks.

<p>p. <ref target=pb417 type=pageref>417</ref>, n. 2. Cancel note. N&amacr;rangsar seems right.

<p>p. <ref target=pb417 type=pageref>417</ref>, l. 2 from foot. The words are <hi>dah b&imacr;st wazn muhr u r&umacr;piya ma&ayin;m&umacr;l</hi>. Elliot, p. 354, renders this &lsquo;ten and twenty times heavier than the current gold muhr and rupee.&rsquo;

<p>p. <ref target=pb418 type=pageref>418</ref>, l. 10. See n. 2 in Elliot, vi, 355. Apparently Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r means that he was the first person to coin double muhrs and double rupees. There is an account of tankas in the Bah&amacr;r-i-&ayin;Ajam, 261, col 2, p. 421, n. 2. But it is 27 in I.O. MSS. 113, p. 423, l. 14. A <hi>&tumlb;ass&umacr;</hi> is more than a finger-breadth, it is the &frac124; of a <hi>gaz</hi> or yard, and should be about 1&frac13; inches.

<p>p. <ref target=pb437 type=pageref>437</ref>. I am indebted to my friend Dr. Hoernle for the explanation of the names of the two sects of Sewras. They should be Tap&amacr; and Kharatara. M&amacr;n Singh&apos;s name in religion was J&imacr;n-simha. See <hi>Epigraphia Indica</hi>, i, 37, and <hi>Ind. Antiquary</hi>, xi, 250. M&amacr;n Singh died at Mairtha (in Jodhp&umacr;r) according to the Jain books, in the beginning of 1618. The head of the Tap&amacr; sect in Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s time was V&imacr;jayasena. There is an elaborate paper on the Jains of Gujarat and Marwar by Colonel Miles in the Transactions R.A.S., iii, pp. 335&ndash;71.

<p>p. <ref target=pb442 type=pageref>442</ref>, l. 8. There is no previous reference to the outbreak of plague in Kashmir, though there is one to its occurrence in the Panjab. There is an interesting account of the plague in &Khbarb;&amacr;f&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, i, 286&ndash;8, in which the description is carried down to the time of Aurangz&imacr;b.




<pb id=pb455 n=455>
<div1 type=Index id=index>
<head>Index.</head>


<div2 type=Letter id=ixa>
<head>A</head>

<p>&ayin;Abb&amacr;s &Shbarb;&amacr;h I, king of Persia, prohibits servants from attacking Qandahar, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>;
  <lb>his written orders, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>;
  <lb>sent Akbar horses, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>;
  <lb>ambassador brings presents, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>;
  <lb>letters from, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>&ndash;6, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>;
  <lb>sends <hi>m&umacr;m&imacr;y&amacr;</hi> and turquoise-earth, <ref target=pb238 type=pageref>238</ref>;
  <lb>sends presents, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>&ndash;3, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>;
  <lb>kills his son, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>;
  <lb>talk with his ambassador about &Sdotb;af&imacr; M&imacr;rz&amacr;&apos;s murder, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>;
  <lb>forbids smoking, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-l-Kar&imacr;m Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r&imacr;, directed to make buildings at M&amacr;nd&umacr;, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f, Akbar&apos;s teacher, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref>, n. 2;
  <lb>tomb at Ajmir, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f, son of Naq&imacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, whipped, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, promoted, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>;
  <lb>rewarded, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f, descendant of rulers of Gujarat, captured, <ref target=pb378 type=pageref>378</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-l-Wahh&amacr;b, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, removed as incompetent, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref> and n. 1.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-llah, son of &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, receives title of Sarfar&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>;
  <lb>brought to Court and promoted, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>;
  <lb>sent for from Ran&tdotb;ambhor prison, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>;
  <lb>unchained and sent to his father&apos;s house, <ref target=pb289 type=pageref>289</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-llah B&amacr;rha, Sayyid, promoted, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>;
  <lb>brings news of victory, <ref target=pb380 type=pageref>380</ref>;
  <lb>styled Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb382 type=pageref>382</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang, Naq&shbarb;band&imacr; &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, began as an ahadi, <ref target=pb27 type=pageref>27</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb72 type=pageref>72</ref>, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>, <ref target=pb200 type=pageref>200</ref>;
  <lb>takes prisoner R&amacr;ja R&amacr;m Chand, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>;
  <lb>produces him in Court, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>;
  <lb>captures Bad&imacr;&ayin;u-z-zam&amacr;n, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to act against R&amacr;n&amacr; and receives title of F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>;
  <lb>said to have killed prisoners, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref> note;
  <lb>defeated in Deccan, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>&ndash;21, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>;
  <lb>elephant sent to, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref> and n. 2, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>;
  <lb>misbehaviour, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>;
  <lb>pardoned, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>&ndash;6;
  <lb>quarrel with &ayin;&Amacr;bid and punishment, <ref target=pb420 type=pageref>420</ref>&ndash;1.

<pb id=pb456 n=456><p>&ayin;Abdu-n-Nab&imacr;, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r read the &ldquo;Forty Sayings&rdquo; with, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m, &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n, son of Bair&amacr;m, message sent to, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref>;
  <lb>enlists &Shbarb;&imacr;r-afgan, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>;
  <lb>presents forty elephants, etc., <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>;
  <lb>comes to Court, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>;
  <lb>his sons, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>;
  <lb>undertakes to subdue Deccan, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>;
  <lb>given an elephant and a superb horse, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>;
  <lb>daughter, the wife of D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, receives 10,000 rupees, <ref target=pb163 type=pageref>163</ref>;
  <lb>sends manuscript of &ldquo;Y&umacr;suf and Zulai&khbarb;&amacr;&rdquo; in M&imacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr;&apos;s handwriting, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>;
  <lb>unsatisfactory conduct, <ref target=pb178 type=pageref>178</ref>&ndash;9;
  <lb>given jagir in Agra province, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Deccan by advice of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>;
  <lb>applies for son&apos;s leave, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>;
  <lb>offering of, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>;
  <lb>at A&hdotb;mad&amacr;b&amacr;d, <ref target=pb429 type=pageref>429</ref>;
  <lb>defeats Mu&zumlb;affar, <ref target=pb431 type=pageref>431</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m &Khbarb;ar (ass), joins &Khbarb;usrau and receives title of Malik Anwar, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>;
  <lb>sewn up in ass&apos;s hide, but survives, <ref target=pb68 type=pageref>68</ref>&ndash;9;
  <lb>given 1,000 rupees, <ref target=pb163 type=pageref>163</ref>;
  <lb>pardoned and sent to Kashmir, <ref target=pb164 type=pageref>164</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m, son of Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, paymaster of ahadis, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>;
  <lb>receives title of Tarbiyat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Tarbiyat.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;m&amacr;n, son of Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l, promoted, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>;
  <lb>receives title of Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>;
  <lb>made governor of Behar, <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>;
  <lb>given &Khbarb;arakpur in fief for a year, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>;
  <lb>fighting elephant sent to, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>;
  <lb>sends to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r makers of eunuchs, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>;
  <lb>quells Patna rebellion, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>&ndash;5;
  <lb>sends presents, <ref target=pb206 type=pageref>206</ref>;
  <lb>comes to Court and presents elephants, etc., <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>;
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb241 type=pageref>241</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-r-Razz&amacr;q Ma&ayin;m&umacr;r&imacr;, made bakhshi, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>;
  <lb>made Court bakhshi (<hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;-&Hdotb;u&zdotb;&umacr;r</hi>), <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>;
  <lb>sent to army, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>;
  <lb>his garden near Agra, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-s-Sal&amacr;m, son of Mu&ayin;a&zumlb;&zumlb;am &Khbarb;&amacr;n, arrives opportunely with reinforcements, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.

<pb id=pb457 n=457><p>&ayin;Abdu-s-Satt&amacr;r, Mull&amacr;, <ref target=pb389 type=pageref>389</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Abdu-s-Sub&hdotb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n, brother of &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam, released and promoted,177, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>;
  <lb>killed in Afghanistan, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p>Abhay R&amacr;m, son of Akhayr&amacr;j, makes riot and is slain, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>&ndash;30.

<p>&ayin;&Amacr;bid, son of Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n, historian, ill-treated, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to Kabul, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>;
  <lb>quarrel with &ayin;Abdu-llah, <ref target=pb420 type=pageref>420</ref>.

<p>&ayin;&Amacr;bid&imacr;n &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, promoted, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See also</hi> Addenda.

<p><hi>Abjad</hi>, <ref target=pb11 type=pageref>11</ref>, n. 3;
  <lb>of words Allah Akbar and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;b-p&amacr;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi>, festival of, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>.

<p>Ab&umacr;-l-b&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg, sent to Qandahar, <ref target=pb224 type=pageref>224</ref>;
  <lb>(qu. perhaps should be Ab&umacr;-n-nab&imacr;?), <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref> and n. 1;
  <lb>governor of Qandahar and sends presents, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>.

<p>Ab&umacr;-l-fat&hdotb;, of Bijapur, also called Dekhan&imacr;, <ref target=pb180 type=pageref>180</ref>;
  <lb>dagger presented to, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>;
  <lb>obtains fief in Nagpur, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>.

<p>Ab&umacr;-l-fat&hdotb; G&imacr;l&amacr;n&imacr;, buried at &Hdotb;asan Abd&amacr;l, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>.

<p>Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, son of Mub&amacr;rak, account of, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>;
  <lb>killed by B&imacr;r Singh Deo, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>;
  <lb>referred to, <ref target=pb93 type=pageref>93</ref>, n. 2;
  <lb>built embankment, <ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref> and n. 1;
  <lb>sister of, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref> and n. 1;
  <lb>report by, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>.

<p>Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan (&Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n IV), son of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah and brother of N&umacr;r Jahan, receives title of I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>;
  <lb>given sword, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>;
  <lb>house of, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>;
  <lb>comes from Burhanpur and waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>;
  <lb>receives title of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>;
  <lb>sends Day&amacr;nat to Gwalior, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>;
  <lb>offerings of, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb283 type=pageref>283</ref>, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>;
  <lb>magnificent offerings, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>;
  <lb>pays his respects, <ref target=pb373 type=pageref>373</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb381 type=pageref>381</ref>;
  <lb>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r visits, <ref target=pb388 type=pageref>388</ref>.

<p>Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, D&amacr;niy&amacr;l&apos;s diwan, had an audience, <ref target=pb79 type=pageref>79</ref>;
  <lb>produces a letter of &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka, <ref target=pb80 type=pageref>80</ref>;
  <lb>joined with &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>;
  <lb>fire in his house, <ref target=pb172 type=pageref>172</ref>;
  <lb>makes offering, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to Deccan as he had long served Sult&amacr;n D&amacr;niy&amacr;l there, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Deccan to inquire into cause of &ayin;Abdu-llah&apos;s defeat, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>;
  <lb>recommends dispatch of &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>;
  <lb>advice <pb id=pb458 n=458>accepted and the &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja sent with &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>;
  <lb>made <hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;-kul</hi>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>;
  <lb>appointed along with Ibrah&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n to be paymaster of household, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>.

<p>Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan Shih&amacr;b&khbarb;&amacr;n&imacr;, made vizier of Bengal in room of Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n (Muq&imacr;m), <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>.

<p>Ab&umacr;-l-q&amacr;sim, brother of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Muhammad Ja&ayin;far, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>.

<p>Ab&umacr;-l-q&amacr;sim Namak&imacr;n, his numerous children, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>;
  <lb>assists in capture of &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>;
  <lb>Jagirdar of Jal&amacr;l&amacr;b&amacr;d, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>;
  <lb>removed from there, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>.

<p>Ab&umacr;-l-waf&amacr;, given money for building bridge, etc., at &Hdotb;asan Abd&amacr;l, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>.

<p>Ab&umacr;-l-wal&imacr;, promoted, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>.

<p>Ab&umacr;-n-nab&imacr; (?), &Umacr;zbeg, formerly governor of Mashhad, promoted, <ref target=pb27 type=pageref>27</ref> and n. 1;
  <lb>remark of, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref> and n. 1;
  <lb>appointed to assist Far&imacr;d, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref> and n. 3.

<p>Adh&amacr;r, place in East Bengal, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref> and note.

<p>&ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, of B&imacr;j&amacr;p&umacr;r, horse sent by, wins race, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>;
  <lb>offers loyalty, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>;
  <lb>gives niece in marriage to singer, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>;
  <lb>musical compositions of, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref> and n. 1, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>;
  <lb>sends offering, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>;
  <lb>styled <hi>farzand</hi>, <ref target=pb388 type=pageref>388</ref>;
  <lb>his diamond, <ref target=pb400 type=pageref>400</ref>;
  <lb>presents elephants, <ref target=pb400 type=pageref>400</ref>&ndash;1.

<p>Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l. <hi>See</hi> &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;m&amacr;n.

<p>Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of Mull&amacr; &Shbarb;ukru-llah, the M&imacr;rz&amacr; Sowcolla of Roe, &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n&apos;s diwan, report from, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>, <ref target=pb387 type=pageref>387</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb402 type=pageref>402</ref>.

<p>Agra, description of, <ref target=pb3 type=pageref>3</ref>&ndash;5, <ref target=pb7 type=pageref>7</ref>.

<p>A&hdotb;d&amacr;d, Afghan, creates disturbance, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>;
  <lb>defeated, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>&ndash;12.

<p>A&hdotb;mad Beg, K&amacr;bul&imacr;, reports &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s march, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>;
  <lb>removed, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to Banga&shbarb;, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>;
  <lb>Attock transferred from, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>;
  <lb>confined at Ran&tdotb;ambhor, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>;
  <lb>released, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>;
  <lb>governor of Kashmir, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p>A&hdotb;mad &Khbarb;&amacr;n, brother of &Khbarb;i&zdotb;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, who was formerly ruler of &Khbarb;andesh, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>.

<p>A&hdotb;mad &Khbarb;a&tdotb;&tdotb;&umacr;, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, a saint, <ref target=pb428 type=pageref>428</ref> and note.

<pb id=pb459 n=459><p>A&hdotb;mad L&amacr;hor&imacr;, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, made M&imacr;r-i-&ayin;Adl, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref> and n. 2.

<p>A&hdotb;mad, Sayyid, editor of T&umacr;zuk, notes by, <ref target=pb164 type=pageref>164</ref>, <ref target=pb200 type=pageref>200</ref>, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>, <ref target=pb428 type=pageref>428</ref>.

<p>A&hdotb;mad, Sult&amacr;n of Gujarat, <ref target=pb420 type=pageref>420</ref>, <ref target=pb424 type=pageref>424</ref>.

<p>A&hdotb;mad&amacr;b&amacr;d, <ref target=pb401 type=pageref>401</ref>;
  <lb>styled Gard&amacr;b&amacr;d, <ref target=pb414 type=pageref>414</ref>;
  <lb>description of, <ref target=pb423 type=pageref>423</ref>;
  <lb>mosque of, <ref target=pb424 type=pageref>424</ref>.

<p>Ahmadnagar, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>;
  <lb>grapes of, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<p>Aim&amacr;qs, cavalry, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>;
  <lb>present to leaders, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>;
  <lb>killed, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref> and note, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>.

<p>Ajmir, entered, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>;
  <lb>description of, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>.

<p>Akbar, emperor, desire for a son, <ref target=pb1 type=pageref>1</ref>;
  <lb>makes S&imacr;kr&imacr; his capital, <ref target=pb2 type=pageref>2</ref>;
  <lb>styled after death <hi>&ayin;Ar&shbarb;-&amacr;&shbarb;y&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>;
  <lb>illiterate, <ref target=pb33 type=pageref>33</ref>;
  <lb>personal appearance, <ref target=pb33 type=pageref>33</ref>&ndash;4;
  <lb>children of, <ref target=pb34 type=pageref>34</ref>;
  <lb>good qualities, <ref target=pb37 type=pageref>37</ref>&ndash;8;
  <lb>declines to kill Hem&umacr;, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>;
  <lb>march to Gujarat, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>&ndash;1;
  <lb>account of, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>&ndash;5;
  <lb>abstinence of, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>;
  <lb>&lsquo;Divine Faith,&rsquo; <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref> and n. 2;
  <lb>builds fort on Chen&amacr;b, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>;
  <lb>changed name for cherries, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>;
  <lb>anniversary of birth, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>;
  <lb>of death, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>;
  <lb>tomb of, visited by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb152 type=pageref>152</ref>;
  <lb>orders about Sunday, <ref target=pb184 type=pageref>184</ref>;
  <lb>weighed twice a year, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>;
  <lb>kept 1,000 cheetahs, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>;
  <lb>appears to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r in a dream, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>;
  <lb>fondness for fruit, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>;
  <lb>in Gujarat, <ref target=pb429 type=pageref>429</ref>, <ref target=pb436 type=pageref>436</ref>.

<p>Akhayr&amacr;j, son of Bhagw&amacr;n D&amacr;s, riot by his sons, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>.

<p>&ayin;&Amacr;lam-gum&amacr;n, name of elephant, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Al&amacr;&hamza;u-d-d&imacr;n, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, grandson of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Sdotb;al&imacr;m, receives title of Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>Albino birds and beasts, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Al&imacr; A&hdotb;mad, Mull&amacr;, son of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;usain, seal-engraver, 1,000 rupees given to, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>;
  <lb>sudden death of, <ref target=pb169 type=pageref>169</ref>;
  <lb>couplet by, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref> and n. 2.

<p>&ayin;Al&imacr; Akbar&shbarb;&amacr;h&imacr;, M&imacr;rz&amacr;, promoted and given Sambhal in fief, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref> and note;
  <lb>sent in pursuit of &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>;
  <lb>given 1,000 rupees, <ref target=pb163 type=pageref>163</ref>;
  <lb>reward to, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>;
  <lb>comes from Deccan, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>;
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Al&imacr; A&sdotb;&ghbarb;ar B&amacr;rha, son of Sayyid Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d, styled Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>&ayin;Al&imacr; B&amacr;rha, Sayyid, promoted, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>.

<pb id=pb460 n=460><p>&ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Ka&rdotb;or&imacr;, receives title of Naubat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref> and n. 4.

<p>&ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Niy&amacr;z&imacr;, sent to Deccan, <ref target=pb184 type=pageref>184</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, ruler of &Khbarb;andesh, letter of &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka to, <ref target=pb79 type=pageref>79</ref>&ndash;80.

<p>&ayin;Al&imacr; Mard&amacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Bah&amacr;dur, wounded and made prisoner, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Al&imacr; Masjid, fort of, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Al&imacr; Qul&imacr; Ist&amacr;jl&umacr;, table servant of Ism&amacr;&ayin;&imacr;l II, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> &Shbarb;&imacr;r-afgan.

<p>Allahd&amacr;d, son of Jal&amacr;l&amacr;, presents to, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>, <ref target=pb390 type=pageref>390</ref>.

<p>Allah-y&amacr;r Koka, styled Himmat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb406 type=pageref>406</ref>.

<p>Alligator, <ref target=pb408 type=pageref>408</ref>.

<p><hi>Alt&umacr;n-tam&ghbarb;&amacr;</hi>, meaning of term, <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref>.

<p>Al&umacr;wa Sarai (11 miles south-east of Sirhind), <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>.

<p>Am&amacr;n&amacr;b&amacr;d, strange occurrence at, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p>Am&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, superintendent of Cambay, <ref target=pb418 type=pageref>418</ref>, <ref target=pb423 type=pageref>423</ref>.

<p>Am&amacr;nu-llah, son of Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, R&umacr;p B&amacr;s called Am&amacr;n&amacr;b&amacr;d after him, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Amar Singh, R&amacr;n&amacr;, of Udaip&umacr;r, defeat of, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>&ndash;51;
  <lb>submits, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>, <ref target=pb276 type=pageref>276</ref>, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>;
  <lb>statue of, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>;
  <lb>sends figs, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>.

<p>Amb&amacr;, an oppressor (Sikh?), heavily fined, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>.

<p>Amba &Khbarb;&amacr;n Kashm&imacr;r&imacr;, receives rank of 1,000, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>;
  <lb>wounds &Shbarb;&imacr;r-afgan and is himself killed, <ref target=pb115 type=pageref>115</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Ambar, Malik, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Malik &ayin;Ambar.

<p>&ayin;Am&imacr;d &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Ghbarb;or&imacr; or Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, ruler of Malwa, <ref target=pb407 type=pageref>407</ref>.

<p>Am&imacr;nu-d-daula, made &Amacr;ti&shbarb;-i-beg&imacr;, or perhaps Y&amacr;ti&shbarb;-beg&imacr;, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref> and n. 1.

<p>Am&imacr;r &Khbarb;usrau, verses by, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb169 type=pageref>169</ref>.

<p>Am&imacr;ru-l-Umar&amacr;, <hi>see</hi> &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>Amroh&imacr;, halt at, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>.

<p><hi>Anan&amacr;s</hi> (pineapple), <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;nand &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of &Shbarb;auq&imacr;, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>;
  <lb>given one day&apos;s offerings, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>An&imacr;r&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; Singh-dalan, title of An&umacr;p R&amacr;y, saves Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r at tiger hunt, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>&ndash;7;
  <lb>receives his title, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>;
  <lb>in charge of Rustam &Sdotb;afaw&imacr;, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>;
  <lb>charge of &Khbarb;usrau transferred from, to &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n (compare Sir T. Roe&apos;s account), <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb373 type=pageref>373</ref>.

<pb id=pb461 n=461><p>Anj&umacr; or Inj&umacr;, <hi>see</hi> Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain.

<p>Antelopes, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>;
  <lb>grave of antelope at Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;rp&umacr;r (&Shbarb;ai&khbarb;&umacr;p&umacr;ra), <ref target=pb90 type=pageref>90</ref>, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>;
  <lb>milk of antelope, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>;
  <lb>prayer carpet made of skins of, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>.

<p>An&umacr;p R&amacr;y, <hi>see</hi> An&imacr;r&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;.

<p>&Amacr;q&amacr; Mull&amacr;, brother of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, i.e. Mu&hdotb;ammad Ja&ayin;far &Amacr;&sdotb;af (No. iii), rank fixed, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>.

<p>Aqam &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr;, pretended Turkish ambassador, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p>&ayin;&Amacr;qil, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, made bakhshi, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>;
  <lb>made a &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb439 type=pageref>439</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Arab &Khbarb;&amacr;n, made fief-holder of Jal&amacr;l&amacr;b&amacr;d, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>;
  <lb>given elephant, <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;r&amacr;m B&amacr;n&umacr;, daughter of Akbar and B&imacr;b&imacr; Daulat-&Shbarb;&amacr;d, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>;
  <lb>character of, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>.

<p><hi>Ar&ghbarb;u&shbarb;tak</hi> (Afghan dance), <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref> and note.

<p>Arjumand B&amacr;n&umacr; (Mumt&amacr;z Ma&hdotb;all), married to &Khbarb;urram, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n (&Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n), <ref target=pb224 type=pageref>224</ref> and note;
  <lb>birth of D&amacr;r&amacr;, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>.

<p>Arjun, Sikh, fifth G&umacr;r&umacr;, favours &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb72 type=pageref>72</ref>:
  <lb>put to death, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref> and n. 1.

<p><hi>&ayin;Ar&shbarb;-&amacr;&shbarb;y&amacr;n&imacr;</hi> (title of Akbar), <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>.

<p>Arsl&amacr;n B&imacr;, governor of K&amacr;hmard fort, <ref target=pb118 type=pageref>118</ref>;
  <lb>waited upon Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to Sahwan, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>.

<p>Asad Mull&amacr;, story-teller, <ref target=pb377 type=pageref>377</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n (No. iii), otherwise M&imacr;rz&amacr; Ja&ayin;far Beg, son of Bad&imacr;&ayin;u-z-zam&amacr;n, of Qazw&imacr;n (the &Amacr;&sdotb;af No. iii of Blochmann), couplet on coins, <ref target=pb11 type=pageref>11</ref>;
  <lb>nephew of Mu&khbarb;t&amacr;r Beg, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>;
  <lb>made vizier, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref> and n. 2;
  <lb>given fief in Panjab, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>;
  <lb>with Parw&imacr;z, <ref target=pb74 type=pageref>74</ref>;
  <lb>left to guard &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>;
  <lb>house visited by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb132 type=pageref>132</ref>;
  <lb>presents ruby, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>;
  <lb>dies at Burhanpur, <ref target=pb222 type=pageref>222</ref>&ndash;3;
  <lb>suspected of privity to Kabul plot of &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;&sdotb;af-&khbarb;&amacr;n (No. ii), <hi>see</hi> &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n &ayin;Al&imacr;.

<p>&Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n (No. iv), <hi>see</hi> Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan.

<p>&Amacr;s&imacr;rgarh, <ref target=pb34 type=pageref>34</ref>.

<p>Attock, fort of, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>.

<p>Avicenna  quoted about wine-drinking, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<pb id=pb462 n=462><p>&Amacr;y&imacr;n-i-Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s regulations, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref>.

<p>&ayin;A&zumlb;&amacr;mat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb432 type=pageref>432</ref>; death, <ref target=pb443 type=pageref>443</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka, &Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, son of &Shbarb;amsu-d-d&imacr;n and J&imacr;j&imacr; Ang&amacr;, rescued by Akbar, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>&ndash;2;
  <lb>accompanies Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r in pursuit of &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>;
  <lb>discovery of his letter to &ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb79 type=pageref>79</ref>&ndash;81;
  <lb>hypocritical character, <ref target=pb138 type=pageref>138</ref>;
  <lb>governor of Gujarat, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Deccan, <ref target=pb183 type=pageref>183</ref>;
  <lb>governor of Malwa, <ref target=pb200 type=pageref>200</ref>;
  <lb>&Shbarb;&amacr;dm&amacr;n, his son, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>;
  <lb>letter from, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>;
  <lb>begs to be sent against the R&amacr;n&amacr;, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>;
  <lb>behaves badly, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>&ndash;8;
  <lb>made over to &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n (No. iv) to be confined in Gwalior, but to be made comfortable, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>;
  <lb>Akbar appears to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r in a dream and begs forgiveness for &ayin;Az&imacr;z, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>;
  <lb>brought from Gwalior and pardoned, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>;
  <lb>gets lakh of rupees, etc., <ref target=pb289 type=pageref>289</ref>.


<div2 id=ixb>
<head>B</head>

<p>B&amacr;b&amacr; &Khbarb;urram, <hi>see</hi> &Khbarb;urram B&amacr;b&amacr; and &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n.

<p>B&amacr;bar, emperor, defeats Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb4 type=pageref>4</ref>;
  <lb>makes garden, <ref target=pb4 type=pageref>4</ref>;
  <lb>styled <hi>Fird&umacr;s-mak&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>;
  <lb>waited on by Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>;
  <lb>his stone terrace at Kabul, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>;
  <lb>his Memoirs, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref> note, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>;
  <lb>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r visits his tomb, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>;
  <lb>revisits stone terrace, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>;
  <lb>defeats R&amacr;n&amacr; S&amacr;ng&amacr;, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>;
  <lb>verse by, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>.

<p>Bad luck, four causes of, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>.

<p>Bad&imacr;&ayin;u-z-zam&amacr;n, fourth son of &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>;
  <lb>goes off to join R&amacr;n&amacr;, arrested and sent to Court, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>;
  <lb>gets 2,000 rupees, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb163 type=pageref>163</ref>, <ref target=pb289 type=pageref>289</ref>, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to expedition against R&amacr;n&amacr;, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;gha, son of R&amacr;n&amacr;, <ref target=pb74 type=pageref>74</ref>.

<p>Bagl&amacr;na, account of, <ref target=pb396 type=pageref>396</ref>.

<p>Bah&amacr;dur, son of Mu&zumlb;affar Gujar&amacr;t&imacr;, makes disturbance, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>;
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.

<p>Bah&amacr;dur, Sultan of Gujarat, <ref target=pb408 type=pageref>408</ref>.

<p>Bah&amacr;dur &Khbarb;&amacr;n Q&umacr;rbeg&imacr;, promoted, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>;
  <lb>governor of Qandahar, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>;
  <lb>makes offering, <ref target=pb379 type=pageref>379</ref>.

<pb id=pb463 n=463><p>Bah&amacr;duru-l-mulk, given standard, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>.

<p>Bahl&umacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb372 type=pageref>372</ref>, <ref target=pb405 type=pageref>405</ref>.

<p>Bahra-war, son of Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p>Bair&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Akbar&apos;s tutor, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>;
  <lb>kills Tard&imacr; Beg, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>;
  <lb>advises Akbar to kill Hem&umacr;, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>;
  <lb>married to Sal&imacr;ma Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Begam, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>.

<p>Bai&shbarb; (Vai&shbarb;ya), Hindu caste, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;k Bhal, village, <ref target=pb165 type=pageref>165</ref>.

<p>Ba&khbarb;tar &Khbarb;&amacr;n Kal&amacr;want, &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s favourite, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;l&amacr; &Hdotb;i&sdotb;&amacr;r, of Kabul, inspected, <ref target=pb118 type=pageref>118</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;m&imacr;y&amacr;n, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref> and note.

<p>Ban&amacr;ras&imacr;, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, misconduct at Patna and punishment, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>&ndash;6.

<p><hi>Bang</hi> and <hi>b&umacr;za</hi>, forbidden, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>.

<p>Bans&imacr;badan, elephant sent by Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;ppa, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref> n. 2.

<p>B&amacr;q&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, ruler of Transoxiana, <ref target=pb26 type=pageref>26</ref>.

<p>Barg&imacr;s (Mahrattas), <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;rha Sayyids, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>.

<p>Bar&khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;r, son of &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;m&amacr;n, son of Mu&hamza;ayyid Beg, ordered back to his fief, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>;
  <lb>given title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See also</hi> &Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam.

<p>Bar&khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;r, brother of &ayin;Abdu-llah F&imacr;r&umacr;z-jang, gets title of Bah&amacr;dur &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb163 type=pageref>163</ref>.

<p>Bas&amacr;wal, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;so, Raja of M&amacr;u, promoted, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>;
  <lb>sent in quest of &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>;
  <lb>in charge of R&amacr;m Chand Band&imacr;lah, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to army against R&amacr;n&amacr;, <ref target=pb200 type=pageref>200</ref>;
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Batoh, village in Gujarat, <ref target=pb436 type=pageref>436</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, grandson of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Sal&imacr;m, promoted, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>;
  <lb>receives title of Mu&ayin;a&zumlb;&zumlb;am &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb79 type=pageref>79</ref>;
  <lb>governor of Delhi, <ref target=pb137 type=pageref>137</ref>;
  <lb>promoted and sent to Delhi, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>;
  <lb>sons promoted, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d B&amacr;rha, <ref target=pb418 type=pageref>418</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d Biy&amacr;t, quoted, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref> note.

<p>B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d Mankal&imacr;, pays respects along with his brothers on coming from Bengal, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>;
  <lb>sent off after getting dress, <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;ysun&ghbarb;ar, son of D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;z Bah&amacr;dur, title of L&amacr;la Beg, son of Ni&zumlb;&amacr;m librarian to Humay&umacr;n, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>;
  <lb>held fief in Bihar, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>.

<pb id=pb464 n=464><p>B&amacr;z Bah&amacr;dur Qalm&amacr;q, waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb79 type=pageref>79</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to Deccan, <ref target=pb184 type=pageref>184</ref>.

<p>Bengal, account of, <ref target=pb207 type=pageref>207</ref>.

<p>Bezoar stones, goats with them brought from Carnatic, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>.

<p>Bhadar, name of A&hdotb;mad&amacr;b&amacr;d citadel, <ref target=pb423 type=pageref>423</ref>.

<p>Bhagw&amacr;n D&amacr;s, R&amacr;ja, son of Bih&amacr;r&imacr; Mal, uncle (and adoptive father) of M&amacr;n Singh, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>;
  <lb>in battle in Gujarat, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>.

<p>Bhakra, village in Ghakhar country, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhanwar</hi>, net, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p>Bh&amacr;o Singh, son of M&amacr;n Singh, promoted <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>, <ref target=pb372 type=pageref>372</ref>;
  <lb>made M&imacr;rz&amacr; R&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>;
  <lb>goes home, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>;
  <lb>offering of, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>;
  <lb>goes to Amber, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>;
  <lb>given a turban, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p>Bh&amacr;rat, grandson of R&amacr;m Chand Band&imacr;lah, made Raja, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>.

<p>Bharj&umacr;, Raja of Bagl&amacr;na, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>, <ref target=pb396 type=pageref>396</ref>, <ref target=pb411 type=pageref>411</ref>.

<p>Bh&imacr;m Nar&amacr;yan, of Gadeha, <ref target=pb411 type=pageref>411</ref>.

<p>Bhoj, R&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb406 type=pageref>406</ref>.

<p>Bhoj, son of Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t Bhadauriy&amacr;, <ref target=pb389 type=pageref>389</ref>.

<p>Bh&umacr;gy&amacr;l tribe, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>.

<p><hi>B&imacr;d m&umacr;ll&amacr;</hi> (willow-tree), <ref target=pb7 type=pageref>7</ref>.

<p>B&imacr;gara, meaning of title, <ref target=pb429 type=pageref>429</ref>.

<p>Bih&amacr;r B&amacr;n&umacr; Begam, daughter of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>.

<p>Bih&amacr;r&imacr; Chand Q&amacr;n&umacr;ng&umacr;, to send infantry to Parw&imacr;z, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>.

<p>Bih&amacr;r&imacr; Mal, R&amacr;ja, first R&amacr;jp&umacr;t to serve Akbar, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>.

<p>Biha&tdotb; River, source of, <ref target=pb92 type=pageref>92</ref>&ndash;3.

<p>Bihi&shbarb;t&amacr;b&amacr;d, that is, Sikandra, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.

<p>Bijay R&amacr;m, riot by, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>.

<p>B&imacr;ka Begam, (step) great-grandmother of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, wife of B&amacr;bar, her garden at Kabul, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref> and n. 1.

<p>Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, R&amacr;ja, title of Patr D&amacr;s, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Gujarat, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>. See Patr D&amacr;s.

<p>Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, Sundar D&amacr;s, R&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, <ref target=pb402 type=pageref>402</ref>.

<p>Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, of Ujjain, founder of observatories, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>.

<p>Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, zamindar of B&amacr;ndh&umacr;, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>.

<p>B&imacr;r Singh Deo, of Bandela, promoted, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>. <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>;
  <lb>kills Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>;
  <lb>reports from, <pb id=pb465 n=465> <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>;
  <lb>brings white cheeta, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>;
  <lb>present to, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>.

<p>Bird, strange, from Z&imacr;rb&amacr;d (Sumatra, etc.), <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>.

<p>Birthday, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s, <ref target=pb9 type=pageref>9</ref> and n. 1.

<p>Bi&shbarb;&umacr;tan, grandson of Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>.

<p>Blackstone throne, account of, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>.

<p>Blochmann quoted, <ref target=pb6 type=pageref>6</ref> notes, and <hi>passim</hi>.

<p><hi>Bokul</hi>, a tree, <ref target=pb6 type=pageref>6</ref> note.

<p>Brahmans, duties of, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>, <ref target=pb357 type=pageref>357</ref>.

<p><hi>Bu&ghbarb;ra</hi>, cooking entertainment, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref> and note.

<p>Buland-a&khbarb;tar, son of &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>.

<p><hi>Bul&ghbarb;ur-&khbarb;&amacr;nas</hi>, free eating-houses, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>.


<div2 id=ixc>
<head>C</head>

<p>Caldron, large, for Ajmir shrine, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Cambay, account of, <ref target=pb415 type=pageref>415</ref>&ndash;17.

<p>Carrier-pigeons, <ref target=pb387 type=pageref>387</ref>.

<p>Carving, curious, <ref target=pb200 type=pageref>200</ref>.

<p>Chain of Justice, <ref target=pb7 type=pageref>7</ref>.

<p>Chaks, dynasty, in Kashmir, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>.

<p><hi>Chambel&imacr;</hi> (white jessamine), <ref target=pb6 type=pageref>6</ref>.

<p><hi>Champa</hi> (sweet-scented flower), <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>.

<p><hi>Chan&amacr;r</hi>-tree (plane), <ref target=pb7 type=pageref>7</ref>.

<p>Chandar Sen, zamindar, <ref target=pb428 type=pageref>428</ref>, <ref target=pb434 type=pageref>434</ref>.

<p>Chandw&amacr;lah, minaret erected at, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>;
  <lb>the Chand&amacr;la or Jandi&amacr;la of, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>.

<p>Chapr&amacr;mau in Qanauj, mangoes of, <ref target=pb377 type=pageref>377</ref>.

<p>Ch&amacr;ran, Hind&imacr; poet, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>.

<p>Chardin, J., traveller, quoted, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref> note.

<p>Charities, <ref target=pb128 type=pageref>128</ref>.

<p>Chaudhar&imacr;s rewarded, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>.

<p><hi>Chaukand&imacr;</hi>, on Jumna, made by Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n, <ref target=pb137 type=pageref>137</ref>.

<p>Cheetas, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>.

<p>Cheleb&imacr;, Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain, sent to make purchases in Persia, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>&ndash;8.

<p>Chhatr&imacr; or Khatr&imacr;, Hindu caste, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>.

<p>Ch&imacr;mn&imacr; (?) Begam, daughter of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, dies at Ajmir, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref> (perhaps the name is Chaman&imacr;).

<p>Ch&imacr;n Qil&imacr;j, promoted, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>;
  <lb>made a &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>;
  <lb>sent to administer Surat, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>;
  <lb>misconduct and death, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>.

<p>Ching&imacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, customs of, <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref>, <ref target=pb68 type=pageref>68</ref>, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>.

<pb id=pb466 n=466><p>Chitor, Akbar killed Jitmal at, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>;
  <lb>taken, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p>Chronograms, <ref target=pb11 type=pageref>11</ref>, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref> and note, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>Coinage, gold and silver, <ref target=pb10 type=pageref>10</ref>&ndash;12, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>;
  <lb>new coinage at Cambay, <ref target=pb417 type=pageref>417</ref>&ndash;18.

<p>Column, iron, at Dh&amacr;r, <ref target=pb407 type=pageref>407</ref>.

<p>Customs, abolition of, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>&ndash;8, <ref target=pb417 type=pageref>417</ref>.

<p>Cypress, <ref target=pb6 type=pageref>6</ref>.


<div2 id=ixd>
<head>D</head>

<p>Dahr, village, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>.

<p>Dahrah, garden near Agra, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Dal&amacr;z&amacr;k, Afghan tribe, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>.

<p>Dall, lake in Kashmir, <ref target=pb93 type=pageref>93</ref>.

<p>Dancing, religious, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>.

<p>D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n, son of Akbar, birth, <ref target=pb34 type=pageref>34</ref>;
  <lb>account of, <ref target=pb35 type=pageref>35</ref>&ndash;6;
  <lb>his elephants, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>;
  <lb>children, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>;
  <lb>employs Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>;
  <lb>gets horse from Akbar, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>;
  <lb>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r directs that he be styled &Shbarb;&amacr;hz&amacr;da marh&umacr;m, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>.

<p>D&amacr;r&amacr; &Shbarb;uk&umacr;h, birth of, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>.

<p>D&amacr;r&amacr;b, son of &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m the &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n, dress given to, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>;
  <lb>promoted and receives Ghazipur in fief, <ref target=pb180 type=pageref>180</ref>;
  <lb>receives dagger, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>;
  <lb>his bravery, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>;
  <lb>receives an elephant, <ref target=pb418 type=pageref>418</ref>.

<p>Darf&umacr;l, country, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref> and n. 3, <ref target=pb162 type=pageref>162</ref> and n. 1;
  <lb>properly D&imacr;zf&umacr;l, the Desful of the maps, in Khuzist&amacr;n, Persia.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Addenda.

<p>D&amacr;&hamza;&umacr;d Kar&amacr;n&imacr;, Afghan ruler of Bengal, <ref target=pb207 type=pageref>207</ref>.

<p>Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, ancestor of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n Lod&imacr;, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p>Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, father of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n Lod&imacr;, serves &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p>Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n brings blackstone throne from Allahabad, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>;
  <lb>faujd&amacr;r of Allahabad and Jaunpur, <ref target=pb217 type=pageref>217</ref>.

<p>Daulat-&Shbarb;&amacr;d, mother of &Shbarb;akaru-n-nis&amacr; and &Amacr;r&amacr;m B&amacr;n&umacr;, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>.

<p>Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of Q&amacr;sim &ayin;Al&imacr;, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>;
  <lb>insults I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah and is punished (text wrongly calls Day&amacr;nat &Sumlb;&amacr;bit), <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>&ndash;9;
  <lb>released, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Gujarat, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>;
  <lb>rank restored, <ref target=pb333 type=pageref>333</ref>;
  <lb>brings &ayin;Abdu-llah, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>.

<pb id=pb467 n=467><p><hi>Deonak</hi>, a kind of monkey, <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>.

<p>Dh&amacr;r, account of, <ref target=pb407 type=pageref>407</ref>;
  <lb>inscription at, <ref target=pb408 type=pageref>408</ref>.

<p>Dh&imacr;rdhar, R&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>.

<p><hi>Dhurpad</hi>, or <hi>durpat</hi>, Hind&imacr; verse or song, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref> and n. 1.

<p>Diamond, called Chamko&rdotb;a, <ref target=pb400 type=pageref>400</ref>;
  <lb>nine diamonds sent from Bihar, <ref target=pb379 type=pageref>379</ref>.

<p>Diamond mines, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>.

<p>D&imacr;&khbarb;t&amacr;n, village in Malwa, <ref target=pb406 type=pageref>406</ref>.

<p>Dil-&amacr;m&imacr;z Garden, near Lahore, <ref target=pb90 type=pageref>90</ref>;
  <lb>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r meets his mother there, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>.

<p>Dil&amacr;war, title of Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n K&amacr;kar, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>, <ref target=pb77 type=pageref>77</ref>, <ref target=pb286 type=pageref>286</ref>, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>;
  <lb>opposed &Khbarb;ugrau, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>;
  <lb>given Jaunp&umacr;r, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>;
  <lb>sends ruby, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p>Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Daulat &Khbarb;&amacr;n and servant of B&amacr;bar, put to death by &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Shbarb;&amacr;h, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p>Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, or &ayin;Am&imacr;d &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Ghbarb;or&imacr;, founder of Malwa dynasty, <ref target=pb407 type=pageref>407</ref>&ndash;8.

<p>Divine Faith, Akbar&apos;s, account of, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref> and n. 2, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>.

<p>Diw&amacr;l&imacr; festival, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p>Dogs, <ref target=pb126 type=pageref>126</ref>, <ref target=pb283 type=pageref>283</ref>, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>.

<p>Do&hdotb;ad parganah, <ref target=pb414 type=pageref>414</ref>, <ref target=pb445 type=pageref>445</ref>.

<p>Downton, Captain, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref> note.

<p>Drinking, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s rules for, <ref target=pb8 type=pageref>8</ref>;
  <lb>resolves not to drink on Friday eves, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>.

<p>Dul&imacr;p, son of R&amacr;y R&amacr;y Singh, rebels, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>;
  <lb>defeated, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>;
  <lb>pardoned, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>;
  <lb>given dress of honour, <ref target=pb217 type=pageref>217</ref>;
  <lb>made Raja, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>;
  <lb>sent to support M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>;
  <lb>put to death, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>Durg&amacr;, R&amacr;y, death and account of, <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref> and Addenda.

<p>Durjan S&amacr;l, zamindar of Khokhar&amacr;, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>.

<p>D&umacr;st Mu&hdotb;ammad, <hi>see</hi> &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n.

<p>Dust storm, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.


<div2 id=ixe>
<head>E</head>

<p>Ear-boring, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>&ndash;8.

<p>Eclipse, of moon, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>;
  <lb>of sun, <ref target=pb183 type=pageref>183</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See also</hi> Addenda.

<p>Elephants, rock near Jal&amacr;l&amacr;b&amacr;d carved into shape of elephant, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>;
  <lb>prices of elephants, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>;
  <lb>death of two elephants from <pb id=pb468 n=468>bite of a mad dog, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>;
  <lb>birth of an elephant, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>;
  <lb>elephant hunting, <ref target=pb401 type=pageref>401</ref>.

<p>English, victory of, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.

<p>Erskine, W., quoted, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref> n. 1;
  <lb>6 notes <ref target=pb2 type=pageref>2</ref> and <ref target=pb4 type=pageref>4</ref>, etc.

<p>Eunuchs, custom of making in Sylhet, abolished by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb150 type=pageref>150</ref>&ndash;1, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>;
  <lb>but see Isl&amacr;m&apos;s presents, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, unless indeed they were sent under orders mentioned in <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>.


<div2 id=ixf>
<head>F</head>

<p>Far&amacr;h, governor of, designs attack on Qandahar, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>.

<p>Far&hdotb;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, strikes Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>.

<p>Far&imacr;d Bu&khbarb;&amacr;r&imacr;, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, confirmed in post of <hi>M&imacr;r Ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>;
  <lb>raised to rank of 5,000, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>;
  <lb>assists in quelling Rajput riot, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref>;
  <lb>sent in pursuit of &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>;
  <lb>victory over &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>;
  <lb>given Bhairawal and title of Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>;
  <lb>receives charge of Arjun G&umacr;r&umacr;&apos;s children and houses, <ref target=pb72 type=pageref>72</ref>;
  <lb>firman issued to, <ref target=pb128 type=pageref>128</ref>;
  <lb>sends ruby ring, <ref target=pb132 type=pageref>132</ref>;
  <lb>made terrace on Jumna, <ref target=pb137 type=pageref>137</ref>;
  <lb>removed from Gujarat on account of servant&apos;s oppression, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to the Panjab, <ref target=pb178 type=pageref>178</ref>;
  <lb>presents New Year&apos;s gifts, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>;
  <lb>settled that he should be governor of Panjab, <ref target=pb198 type=pageref>198</ref>;
  <lb>offerings of, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>;
  <lb>promoted to 6,000 with 5,000 horse, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>;
  <lb>sent to K&amacr;ngra, <ref target=pb283 type=pageref>283</ref>;
  <lb>suspects S&umacr;raj Singh, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>;
  <lb>death and character of, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>.

<p>Far&imacr;d&amacr;b&amacr;d, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>.

<p>Far&imacr;d&umacr;n, son of Mu&hdotb;ammad Qul&imacr; Barl&amacr;s, promoted, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>, <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>;
  <lb>gets fief in Allahabad, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref>;
  <lb>given standard, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Deccan, <ref target=pb184 type=pageref>184</ref>;
  <lb>dies at Udaipur, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p>Farmul&imacr;, Afghan tribe, barricade Kabul streets, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>.

<p>Farru&khbarb; Beg, painter, gets present, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>.

<p>Fat&hdotb;-b&amacr;&ghbarb;, garden, <ref target=pb429 type=pageref>429</ref>, <ref target=pb434 type=pageref>434</ref>.

<p>Fat&hdotb; Gaj, elephant, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Fat&hdotb;p&umacr;r, so called after conquest of Gujarat, <ref target=pb2 type=pageref>2</ref>.

<pb id=pb469 n=469><p>Fat&hdotb;u-llah, son of &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Ab&umacr;-l-fat&hdotb;, involved in &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s plot and imprisoned, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>.

<p>Fat&hdotb;u-llah, &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m, promoted, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>.

<p>Fat&hdotb;u-llah, &Khbarb;w&amacr;jag&imacr;, confirmed as <hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>.

<p>F&amacr;&zdotb;il, M&imacr;r, faujd&amacr;r of Qab&umacr;lah, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>.

<p>F&amacr;&zdotb;il &Khbarb;&amacr;n, i.e. &Amacr;&ghbarb;&amacr; F&amacr;&zdotb;il, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>.

<p>Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of Sulaim&amacr;n Beg, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>;
  <lb>promoted and sent to Deccan, <ref target=pb162 type=pageref>162</ref>;
  <lb>made <hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n&apos;s army, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>;
  <lb>dies, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>.

<p>Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of Hid&amacr;yatu-llah, <ref target=pb383 type=pageref>383</ref>, <ref target=pb389 type=pageref>389</ref>;
  <lb>sent against the Jamindar of Jaitpur, <ref target=pb390 type=pageref>390</ref>, <ref target=pb391 type=pageref>391</ref>.

<p>Fi&ghbarb;&amacr;n&imacr;, poet, <ref target=pb150 type=pageref>150</ref> and n. 1;
  <lb>quoted, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>.

<p><hi>Fil&umacr;n&imacr;y&amacr;</hi>, explained, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref> and n. 3.

<p>Finch, W., quoted, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref> note, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref> n. 2, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref> note, <ref target=pb381 type=pageref>381</ref> note.

<p><hi>Fird&umacr;s-mak&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> B&amacr;bar.

<p>Fishing, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>, <ref target=pb436 type=pageref>436</ref>.

<p>Flowers, Indian, superior to all others, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>.

<p>Frank ports, pineapples grown at, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>.

<p>Frank saddles, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>.

<p>Franks of Goa plunder four vessels, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Fruits, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>;
  <lb>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s partiality for mangoes, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>;
  <lb>description of fruits, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, <ref target=pb397 type=pageref>397</ref>, <ref target=pb422 type=pageref>422</ref>, <ref target=pb435 type=pageref>435</ref>, <ref target=pb439 type=pageref>439</ref>.


<div2 id=ixg>
<head>G</head>

<p>Gad&amacr; &ayin;Al&imacr;, captures Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>.

<p>Gad&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;, Mull&amacr;, account of, <ref target=pb290 type=pageref>290</ref>.

<p><hi>Galahr&imacr;</hi> (squirrel), animal called &lsquo;master of mice,&rsquo; <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>&ndash;5.

<p>Game-bag, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>, <ref target=pb126 type=pageref>126</ref>, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p>Ghakkar tribe, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p>&Ghbarb;archal, Badakhshan tribe, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>.

<p>&Ghbarb;ar&imacr;b-&khbarb;&amacr;na, in the Khyber, <ref target=pb11 type=pageref>11</ref> (now known as Land&imacr;-Kotal).

<p>&Ghbarb;au&sumlb;, Mu&hdotb;ammad, <ref target=pb426 type=pageref>426</ref> and note.

<p>&Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;, M&imacr;rz&amacr;, son of J&amacr;n&imacr; Beg, sister betrothed by Akbar to &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>;
  <lb>account of, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>;
  <lb>rewarded with <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref> lakhs of dams, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Qandahar, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>;
  <lb>poetry of, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>;
  <lb>ordered to Qandahar, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>;
  <lb>reports about Qandahar, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>;
  <lb>death and character, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>&ndash;4.

<pb id=pb470 n=470><p>&Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb; Beg, father of N&umacr;r Jah&amacr;n, styled I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daula, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref> and n. 2;
  <lb>put in charge of Agra, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>;
  <lb>his son &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f executed, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>;
  <lb>rank of 2,000, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>;
  <lb>made Vizier, <ref target=pb200 type=pageref>200</ref>;
  <lb>house of, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>;
  <lb>receives rank of 5,000 with 2,000 horse, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>;
  <lb>affronted by Day&amacr;nat, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>;
  <lb>offering of, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>;
  <lb>records death of grandchild, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>;
  <lb>contingent reviewed <ref target=pb374 type=pageref>374</ref>;
  <lb>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r gives his own turban to, <ref target=pb378 type=pageref>378</ref>.

<p>&Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb; Zain-&khbarb;&amacr;n&imacr;, diwan of Patna, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>;
  <lb>punished, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>.

<p>&Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n of M&amacr;nd&umacr;, murder of, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>.

<p>&Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n &ayin;Al&imacr;, <hi>see</hi> Naq&imacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>&Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n &ayin;Al&imacr; &Amacr;&sdotb;af-&khbarb;&amacr;n (No. ii), father of N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p>Ghorkhatr&imacr;, near Peshawar, ignorance of faqirs at, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>.

<p><hi>G&imacr;l&amacr;s</hi> (cherry), <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref> and n. 1.

<p>Gladwin, F. referred to, <ref target=pb8 type=pageref>8</ref> n. 2.

<p>Goa, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Gobind D&amacr;s, Vakil, killed, <ref target=pb292 type=pageref>292</ref>.

<p>Gobindw&amacr;l, news of victory received at, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>;
  <lb>residence of Arjun G&umacr;r&umacr;, <ref target=pb72 type=pageref>72</ref>.

<p>Grapes, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>, <ref target=pb404 type=pageref>404</ref>, etc.

<p>Gujars, caste, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>.

<p>Gul-af&shbarb;&amacr;n, B&amacr;bar&apos;s garden at Agra, <ref target=pb4 type=pageref>4</ref>&ndash;5.

<p>Gul-ru&khbarb; Begam, mother of Sal&imacr;ma Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Begam, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>.

<p>Gul&amacr;b-p&amacr;&shbarb;&imacr;, ceremony of, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>.

<p>Gulbah&amacr;r, cherries of, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>.

<p>Gwalior, <ref target=pb4 type=pageref>4</ref>, etc.


<div2 id=ixh>
<head>H</head>

<p><hi>&Hdotb;ab&shbarb;&imacr;</hi>, kind of grape, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>.

<p>H&amacr;d&imacr;, Mu&hdotb;ammad, quoted, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref> n. 4, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref> n. 6.

<p>&Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb;, omens taken from, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb381 type=pageref>381</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb; Jam&amacr;l, fountain near Ajmir, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref> n. 1.

<p>&Hdotb;aidar, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, of Ahmadabad, <ref target=pb426 type=pageref>426</ref>.

<p>Hailstorm, <ref target=pb92 type=pageref>92</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;aj&imacr; B&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg, given 4,000 rupees, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>;
  <lb>gets title of &Umacr;zbeg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr; Koka, sister of &Sdotb;a&ayin;&amacr;dat Y&amacr;r Koka, foster-sister of Akbar, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr; M&imacr;rak and others released from Gwalior, <ref target=pb180 type=pageref>180</ref>.

<pb id=pb471 n=471><p>&Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &ayin;Abdu-&shbarb;-&Shbarb;ak&umacr;r, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &ayin;Al&imacr;, physician, learned in mathematics, <ref target=pb68 type=pageref>68</ref>;
  <lb>subaqueous chamber, <ref target=pb152 type=pageref>152</ref>;
  <lb>death and character, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See also</hi> p. <ref target=pb124 type=pageref>124</ref>, where the &lsquo;<hi>Y&amacr;d</hi>&rsquo; is a mistake of text.

<p>&Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Mu&zumlb;affar, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>;
  <lb>rank fixed, <ref target=pb79 type=pageref>79</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> J&amacr;l&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m.

<p>&Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &Sdotb;adr&amacr;, receives title of Mas&imacr;&hdotb;u-z-zam&amacr;n, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>;
  <lb>produces hermaphrodite cat, <ref target=pb374 type=pageref>374</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;ak&imacr;m <hi>Y&amacr;d</hi> &ayin;Al&imacr;, <ref target=pb124 type=pageref>124</ref>. The <hi>Y&amacr;d</hi> is a mistake of text. The name is &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &ayin;Al&imacr;, and he is the man who treated Akbar in his last illness.

<p>&Hdotb;am&imacr;d Gujar&amacr;t&imacr;, physician, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>&ndash;9.

<p>Harid&amacr;s Jh&amacr;l&amacr;, servant of the R&amacr;n&amacr;, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;asan, M&imacr;rz&amacr;, one of &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;&apos;s twin sons, seized as he was going to join &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref> and n. 2 (apparently he was put to death, as no more is heard of him).

<p>&Hdotb;asan, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, son of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Bah&amacr;, <ref target=pb27 type=pageref>27</ref> and n. 2.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>&Hdotb;asan Abd&amacr;l, place, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;asan &ayin;Al&imacr; Turkum&amacr;n promoted, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;asan and &Hdotb;usain, twin sons of &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref><corr sic=":">;</corr>
  <lb>for &Hdotb;usain <hi>see also</hi> <ref target=pb118 type=pageref>118</ref>, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;asan Beg, ambassador of the king of Persia, receives 10,000 rupees, <ref target=pb90 type=pageref>90</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;asan Miy&amacr;na, <ref target=pb405 type=pageref>405</ref>.

<p>H&amacr;&shbarb;im, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, of Dahb&imacr;d, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p>H&amacr;&shbarb;im &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Orissa, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>;
  <lb>sends forty-four elephants, <ref target=pb183 type=pageref>183</ref>;
  <lb>made governor of Kashmir, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>;
  <lb>has leave to go there, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>;
  <lb>&Sdotb;afdar &Khbarb;&amacr;n substituted for him, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;&amacr;&sdotb;ilp&umacr;r, village, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>, <ref target=pb404 type=pageref>404</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;&amacr;tim, son of Mangl&imacr;, or Mankl&imacr;, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>.

<p>Haty&amacr;, village, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>.

<p>Haz&amacr;ra, a soothsayer, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>.

<p>Haz&amacr;ras, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>.

<p>Hem&umacr;, rebel, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>;
  <lb>killed, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Hid&amacr;yatu-llah, styled Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb383 type=pageref>383</ref>.

<p>Hil&amacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <hi>saz&amacr;wal</hi>, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>;
  <lb>makes ring-hunt at Rohtas in Panjab, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<pb id=pb472 n=472><p>Himmat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, promoted, <ref target=pb439 type=pageref>439</ref>;
  <lb>he is Allah-y&amacr;r Koka, <ref target=pb406 type=pageref>406</ref>.

<p>Hind&amacr;l, father of Ruqayya Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Begam, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>;
  <lb>tomb of, at Kabul, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>.

<p>Hindu castes, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>.

<p>Ho&ddotb;al, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r arrives at, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>.

<p>Hol&imacr; ceremonies, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>.

<p>Hum&amacr;m, &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m, buried at &Hdotb;asan Abd&amacr;l, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>.

<p>Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n, emperor, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>;
  <lb>gave title of <hi>&Shbarb;&imacr;r&imacr;n-qala&mdotb;</hi> to &ayin;Abdu-&sdotb;-&Sdotb;amad, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>;
  <lb>death of, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>;
  <lb>hunted rhinoceros near the K&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>;
  <lb>poured water on saint&apos;s hands, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>;
  <lb>betrothed Sal&imacr;ma Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Begam to Bair&amacr;m, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>.

<p>Hunting, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r prefers shooting with a gun, and on one day killed eighteen deer, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>;
  <lb>hunted for <ref target=pb3 type=pageref>3</ref> months <ref target=pb6 type=pageref>6</ref> days, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>, <ref target=pb276 type=pageref>276</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;usain Beg, diwan of Bengal, makes offering, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;usain Beg, sent by &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>;
  <lb>makes offering, <ref target=pb372 type=pageref>372</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;usain (properly &Hdotb;asan) Beg Bada&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr; joins &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>;
  <lb>suggests going to Kabul, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>;
  <lb>shoots at boatmen, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>;
  <lb>produced before Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb68 type=pageref>68</ref>;
  <lb>sewn up in ox-hide and dies, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>;
  <lb>reference to, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;usain Cheleb&imacr; sent to Persia, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>&ndash;8.

<p>&Hdotb;usain J&amacr;m&imacr;, his dream, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref>;
  <lb>disciples rewarded, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>;
  <lb>gets twenty lakhs of dams, <ref target=pb72 type=pageref>72</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;usain &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Herat, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;usain M&imacr;rz&amacr;, son of &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, alleged petition from, <ref target=pb118 type=pageref>118</ref>;
  <lb>killed, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>.

<p><hi>&Hdotb;usain&imacr;</hi> (kind of grape), <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref> n. 1, <ref target=pb404 type=pageref>404</ref>.

<p>&Hdotb;us&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n, dervish, son of &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Bada&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;, married to <corr sic="Ab&umacr;l-l-fa&zdotb;l&apos;s">Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l&apos;s</corr> sister, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref> and n. 1.

<p>&Hdotb;us&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n, son of Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n Inj&umacr;, <ref target=pb404 type=pageref>404</ref>.

<p>H&umacr;&shbarb;ang, son of Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, comes from Bengal, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>;
  <lb>produces Maghs, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>;
  <lb>styled Ikr&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>.

<p>H&umacr;&shbarb;ang &Ghbarb;&umacr;r&imacr;, Sultan of M&amacr;nd&umacr;, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>, <ref target=pb408 type=pageref>408</ref>.

<p>Hydrophobia, death of two elephants from, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>.


<pb id=pb473 n=473>
<div2 id=ixi>
<head>I</head>

<p><hi>Ibachki&amacr;n</hi>, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>.

<p>Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, son of Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n Koka, promoted and styled Ki&shbarb;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>;
  <lb>governor of Rohtas, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>;
  <lb>faujd&amacr;r of Uch, <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>;
  <lb>joins army against &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n, <ref target=pb209 type=pageref>209</ref>;
  <lb>killed in battle, <ref target=pb210 type=pageref>210</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See also</hi> Ki&shbarb;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m B&amacr;b&amacr;, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, the Afghan, confined in Chunar, <ref target=pb77 type=pageref>77</ref>.

<p>Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Hdotb;usain, M&imacr;r Ba&hdotb;r, <hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> of ahadis, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>;
  <lb>sent to &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>&ndash;8.

<p>Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Hdotb;usain, M&imacr;rz&amacr;, rebel, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>.

<p>Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, promoted and made joint-paymaster of household, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>;
  <lb>his offering, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Behar, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>;
  <lb>conquers Khokhar&amacr;, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Bengal, <ref target=pb373 type=pageref>373</ref>;
  <lb>sends diamonds, <ref target=pb379 type=pageref>379</ref>.

<p>Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n K&amacr;kar, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Dil&amacr;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m Lod&imacr;, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n, son of Sikandar Lod&imacr;, killed, <ref target=pb4 type=pageref>4</ref>, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>;
  <lb>tyranny of, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p>Ifti&khbarb;&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, father of Mu&ayin;taqid &Khbarb;&amacr;n, sends rare elephant, <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>;
  <lb>promoted for good service in Bengal, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>;
  <lb>joins army against &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n, <ref target=pb209 type=pageref>209</ref>;
  <lb>killed in battle, <ref target=pb210 type=pageref>210</ref>.

<p>Ihtim&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n (Kotw&amacr;l), sent to bring Bad&imacr;&ayin;u-z-zam&amacr;n to Court, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>;
  <lb>promoted and appointed to the charge of the Bengal fleet, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>;
  <lb>in expedition against &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n, <ref target=pb209 type=pageref>209</ref>. According to the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma he had charge of M&imacr;r &Hdotb;asan, son of &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;.

<p>I&khbarb;tiy&amacr;ru-l-mulk, thrown from his horse and killed, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>.

<p>Ikr&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb433 type=pageref>433</ref>.

<p>Ilf &Khbarb;&amacr;n, promoted, <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>.

<p>Im&amacr;m Qul&imacr;, ruler of Transoxiana, puts M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Hdotb;usain, or at least the pretended M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Hdotb;usain, to death, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>.

<p>&ayin;In&amacr;yat Beg, mistake for &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb; Beg, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>.

<p>&ayin;In&amacr;yat &Khbarb;&amacr;n (text has &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;), promoted, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref> and n. 1, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>;
  <lb>made &ayin;In&amacr;yat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>.

<p>Inj&umacr;, <hi>see</hi> Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain.

<p>Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma quoted, <hi>passim</hi>.

<p>Ir&amacr;dat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, brother of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n (Ja&ayin;far), made <hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> of Patna <pb id=pb474 n=474>and &Hdotb;&amacr;j&imacr;p&umacr;r, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref><corr sic=",">;</corr>
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>, <ref target=pb372 type=pageref>372</ref>.

<p>&Imacr;raj, eldest son of &Khbarb;&amacr;n&khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n, dress of honour sent to, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>;
  <lb>obtains leave from Parw&imacr;z, <ref target=pb180 type=pageref>180</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>;
  <lb>given jewelled dagger, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>;
  <lb>styled &Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>;
  <lb>given sword, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>;
  <lb>sent again to Deccan, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb222 type=pageref>222</ref>;
  <lb>comes to Court, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>;
  <lb>sent back to Deccan, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>;
  <lb>offering of, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>;
  <lb>defeats Malik &ayin;Ambar, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>, etc.

<p>Irvine, W., quoted, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref> n. 3, etc.

<p>&ayin;&Imacr;s&amacr; Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n, M&imacr;rz&amacr;, promoted, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>;
  <lb>came from Sambhal and honoured, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>.

<p>Isl&amacr;m, &Khbarb;&amacr;n, original name &ayin;Al&amacr;&hamza;u-d-d&imacr;n, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>;
  <lb>letters from, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>;
  <lb>sword sent to, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>;
  <lb>he and his brother Q&amacr;sim could not agree, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>;
  <lb>presented with a lakh of rupees collected by him, <ref target=pb180 type=pageref>180</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Behar and to Bengal, in spite of objections about his youth, <ref target=pb208 type=pageref>208</ref>;
  <lb>made Dacca his headquarters, <ref target=pb209 type=pageref>209</ref>;
  <lb>sends <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref> elephants, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>;
  <lb>sends the elephant Bans&imacr;badan, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>;
  <lb>sends elephants and fifty eunuchs, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>;
  <lb>made officer of 6,000, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>;
  <lb>death and character, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>.

<p>Ism&amacr;&ayin;&imacr;l, son of Mu&hdotb;ammad &Ghbarb;au&sumlb;, <ref target=pb439 type=pageref>439</ref>.

<p>I&ayin;tib&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, given Gwalior in fief, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>;
  <lb>offering of, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb372 type=pageref>372</ref>.

<p>I&ayin;tim&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, of Gujarat, <ref target=pb429 type=pageref>429</ref>, <ref target=pb430 type=pageref>430</ref>.

<p>I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daula, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb; Beg.

<p>I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, the father of N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n, and the &Amacr;&sdotb;af No. iv of Blochmann, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan.

<p>I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, a younger brother (?) of &Amacr;&sdotb;af No. iv, and also known as &Shbarb;&amacr;p&umacr;r, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref> n. 3;
  <lb>he became governor of Kashmir, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>;
  <lb>his presents, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>;
  <lb>censured for allowing prisoners to escape, <ref target=pb373 type=pageref>373</ref>.
  <lb>(For this I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d <hi>see</hi> Maa&sumlb;iru-l-Umar&amacr;, i, <ref target=pb180 type=pageref>180</ref>.)



<div2 id=ixj>
<head>J</head>

<p>Jadr&umacr;p, Sany&amacr;s&imacr;, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>.

<p>Jagann&amacr;th, Raja, son of Bih&amacr;r&imacr; Mal, dress, etc., presented to, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>.

<pb id=pb475 n=475><p>Jagat Gos&amacr;&hamza;&imacr;n (Jodh B&amacr;&imacr;) daughter of Mota Raja, mother of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram, that is &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>.

<p>Jagat Singh, eldest son of M&amacr;n Singh, marriage-gift of 8,000 rupees sent to, on the marriage of his daughter to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>;
  <lb>father of Mah&amacr; Singh, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p>Jagat Singh, grandson of R&amacr;n&amacr; Amar, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>.

<p>Jagdalak, Afghanistan, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>.

<p>Jagman, R&amacr;ja (of Dhandhera, Akbar-n&amacr;ma, trans., ii, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>);
  <lb>his jagir given to Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb241 type=pageref>241</ref><corr>.</corr>

<p>Jah&amacr;n-&amacr;r&amacr;, garden at Kabul made by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>.

<p>Jah&amacr;nd&amacr;r, younger son of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>;
  <lb>Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n made his tutor, <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>;
  <lb>examined by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r and found to be a born devotee (?), <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>. (He died unmarried. Apparently he is the Sultan Ta&khbarb;t of Terry.)

<p>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, his accession, <ref target=pb1 type=pageref>1</ref> and note;
  <lb>birth, <ref target=pb2 type=pageref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb9 type=pageref>9</ref> and n. 1;
  <lb>named Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Sal&imacr;m, <ref target=pb2 type=pageref>2</ref>;
  <lb>always called by Akbar &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;&umacr; B&amacr;b&amacr;, <ref target=pb2 type=pageref>2</ref>;
  <lb>assumes title of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r and N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n, <ref target=pb3 type=pageref>3</ref>;
  <lb>fondness for mangoes, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>;
  <lb>Chain of Justice, <ref target=pb7 type=pageref>7</ref>;
  <lb>establishes twelve Regulations, <ref target=pb7 type=pageref>7</ref>&ndash;10;
  <lb>drinking habits, <ref target=pb8 type=pageref>8</ref>;
  <lb>forbids mutilations and slaughter of beasts on birthday, etc., <ref target=pb9 type=pageref>9</ref>;
  <lb>coinage of, <ref target=pb10 type=pageref>10</ref>&ndash;12;
  <lb>releases State prisoners, <ref target=pb10 type=pageref>10</ref> and n. 2;
  <lb>eldest child, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;nu-n-nis&amacr;, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref> and n. 1;
  <lb>&Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref> and n. 1;
  <lb>his son Parw&imacr;z, <ref target=pb18 type=pageref>18</ref>;
  <lb>other children, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>;
  <lb>abstains from wine on Friday eves, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>;
  <lb>orders names of God to be collected, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>;
  <lb>reads with &ayin;Abdu-n-Nab&imacr;, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>;
  <lb>orders about grants of land and about seals, <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref>;
  <lb>favours M&imacr;rz&amacr; Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>;
  <lb>causes <corr sic="Ab&umacr;l-l-fa&zdotb;l">Ab&umacr;-l-fa&zdotb;l</corr> to be murdered, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>&ndash;5;
  <lb>&Shbarb;ai&khbarb; B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d&apos;s mother his nurse for one day, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>;
  <lb>his sisters, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>;
  <lb>abolishes fees on presents, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>;
  <lb>excuses nobles from making gifts, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>;
  <lb>abolishes transit dues, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>;
  <lb>celebrates New Year, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>;
  <lb>told of flight of &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>;
  <lb>pursues him next <pb id=pb476 n=476>morning, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>;
  <lb>account of Divine Faith, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>&ndash;1;
  <lb>advantage of acting on his own judgment, <ref target=pb68 type=pageref>68</ref>;
  <lb>establishes free eating-houses, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>;
  <lb>meets his mother, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>;
  <lb>solar weighment, <ref target=pb77 type=pageref>77</ref>;
  <lb>hunting, details of, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>;
  <lb>resolves to take Transoxiana, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>;
  <lb>marches towards Kabul, <ref target=pb90 type=pageref>90</ref>;
  <lb>monument to antelope, <ref target=pb90 type=pageref>90</ref>;
  <lb>march through Ghakkar country, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>;
  <lb>encamps at Al&imacr; Masjid, and traverses Khyber, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>;
  <lb>has an elephant carved in stone, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>;
  <lb>describes stages to Kabul, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>&ndash;5;
  <lb>enters Kabul city, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>;
  <lb>visits gardens, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>;
  <lb>makes Jah&amacr;n-&amacr;r&amacr; garden, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>;
  <lb>records abolition of customs, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>;
  <lb>visits B&amacr;bar&apos;s seat, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>;
  <lb>engraves name there, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>;
  <lb>knows Turk&imacr; and adds to B&amacr;bar&apos;s Memoirs, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref> and note;
  <lb>visits B&amacr;bar&apos;s tomb, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>;
  <lb>lunar weighment, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>;
  <lb>visits &Khbarb;urram (&Shbarb;&amacr;h-Jah&amacr;n) in &Umacr;rta-B&amacr;gh, <ref target=pb115 type=pageref>115</ref>;
  <lb>arranges to leave Kabul, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>;
  <lb>large spider, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref>;
  <lb>visits B&amacr;bar&apos;s throne-place, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>;
  <lb>&Khbarb;usrau&apos;s plot, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>;
  <lb>solar weighment, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>;
  <lb>sends for names of God, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>;
  <lb>saw mother at Dil-&amacr;m&imacr;z Garden, near Lahore, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>;
  <lb>asks Jagat Singh&apos;s daughter in marriage, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>;
  <lb>marries her, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>;
  <lb>aunt&apos;s death, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>;
  <lb>lunar weighment, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>;
  <lb>visits father&apos;s tomb and account of building there, <ref target=pb152 type=pageref>152</ref>;
  <lb>character of son Jah&amacr;nd&amacr;r, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>;
  <lb>composes ode, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>;
  <lb>marries R&amacr;m Chand Band&imacr;lah&apos;s daughter, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>;
  <lb>cruelty to servants, <ref target=pb164 type=pageref>164</ref>;
  <lb>game-bag, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>;
  <lb>orders about eunuchs, <ref target=pb150 type=pageref>150</ref>, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>;
  <lb>black-stone throne, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>;
  <lb>about damage to crops, <ref target=pb163 type=pageref>163</ref>, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>;
  <lb>does not shoot or eat meat on Sundays and Thursdays, <ref target=pb184 type=pageref>184</ref>;
  <lb>dangerous tiger hunt, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>&ndash;7;
  <lb>does not eat fish which have no scales, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>;
  <lb>fishing, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>;
  <lb>hunting, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>;
  <lb>game-bag, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>;
  <lb>order to lamplighters, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>;
  <lb>relieves M&imacr;r-i-&ayin;Adl and Q&amacr;&zdotb;&imacr; from ceremony of prostration, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>;
  <lb>prohibits certain practices of Amirs, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref>;
  <lb>illness, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>;
  <lb>composes a couplet, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>;
  <lb>experiment on fowl, <ref target=pb238 type=pageref>238</ref>;
  <lb>gives money <pb id=pb477 n=477>to &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; P&imacr;r for a mosque, <ref target=pb241 type=pageref>241</ref>;
  <lb>walked <ref target=pb2 type=pageref>2</ref> miles to Ajmir, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>;
  <lb>visits Pushkar lake, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>;
  <lb>caldron for Ajmir shrine, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>;
  <lb>shooting at Pushkar, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>;
  <lb>illness, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>;
  <lb>bores his ears, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>;
  <lb>Akbar appears to him in a dream, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>;
  <lb>visits &Hdotb;&amacr;fi&zumlb; Jam&amacr;l, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>;
  <lb>Akbar&apos;s fondness for fruit, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>;
  <lb><hi>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; &ayin;i&tumlb;r</hi>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>;
  <lb>description of strange bird, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>;
  <lb>sends R&amacr;n&amacr; farman bearing impression of his fingers, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref> and note, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>;
  <lb>receives Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram, <ref target=pb277 type=pageref>277</ref>;
  <lb>gifts to dervishes, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>;
  <lb>resolves to go to Deccan, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>;
  <lb>gives name of D&amacr;r&amacr; &Shbarb;uk&umacr;h to Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram&apos;s son, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>;
  <lb>receives &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n&apos;s offerings, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>&ndash;6;
  <lb>shows his skill to Kunwar Karan, <ref target=pb286 type=pageref>286</ref>&ndash;7;
  <lb>visits Ajmir shrine, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>;
  <lb>lights up &Amacr;n&amacr; S&amacr;gar, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>;
  <lb>drinking habits, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>;
  <lb>visits I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>;
  <lb>ruby and pearls, <ref target=pb322 type=pageref>322</ref>;
  <lb>account of Abyssinian elephant, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>;
  <lb>married when prince a daughter of R&amacr;wal Bh&imacr;m, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>;
  <lb>death of granddaughter, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>;
  <lb>his grief and order that Wednesday be called Kam-&shbarb;amba, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>;
  <lb>birth of grandson, &Shbarb;&amacr;h &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>;
  <lb>puts railing round Mu&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n&apos;s tomb, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>;
  <lb>recalls Parw&imacr;z, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>;
  <lb>describes outbreak of plague, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>;
  <lb>has marble statues made of R&amacr;n&amacr; and his son, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>;
  <lb>is weighed, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>;
  <lb>wrestler&apos;s performances, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>;
  <lb>conversation about death of &Sdotb;af&imacr; M&imacr;rz&amacr;, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>;
  <lb>anecdote about a thief, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>;
  <lb>rides in an English (?) carriage, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>;
  <lb>leaves Ajmir, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>;
  <lb>account of what he did there, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>;
  <lb>at R&amacr;msar, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>;
  <lb>account of <hi>s&amacr;ras</hi> birds, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>;
  <lb>hunting, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>;
  <lb>N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n shoots a bird, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>;
  <lb>Persian melons, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>;
  <lb>honours I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daulah by allowing ladies to unveil before him, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>;
  <lb>large banyan-tree, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>;
  <lb>account of four-horned antelope, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>;
  <lb>executes a matricide, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>;
  <lb>large tamarind-tree, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>;
  <lb>visits Ujjain, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>;
  <lb>large banyan, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>;
  <lb>renamed S&amacr;ngor Kam&amacr;lp&umacr;r, <pb id=pb478 n=478>361;
  <lb>tiger-shooting, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>;
  <lb>arrives at M&amacr;nd&umacr;, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>;
  <lb>legend about M&amacr;nd&umacr;, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>;
  <lb>game-bag, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>;
  <lb>remits offerings by servants, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>;
  <lb>shoots lion, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>;
  <lb>executes captain of the guard, <ref target=pb373 type=pageref>373</ref>;
  <lb>sends cup to &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s, <ref target=pb374 type=pageref>374</ref>;
  <lb>shoots tiger, <ref target=pb374 type=pageref>374</ref>;
  <lb>takes his turban off and gives it to &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb; Beg, <ref target=pb378 type=pageref>378</ref>;
  <lb>prays for rain, <ref target=pb378 type=pageref>378</ref>;
  <lb>takes omen from &Hdotb;afi&zumlb;, <ref target=pb381 type=pageref>381</ref>;
  <lb>visits Haft Man&zumlb;ar in M&amacr;nd&umacr;, <ref target=pb381 type=pageref>381</ref>;
  <lb>visits buildings, <ref target=pb384 type=pageref>384</ref>;
  <lb>invents <hi>n&amacr;dir&imacr;</hi> dress, <ref target=pb384 type=pageref>384</ref>;
  <lb>gives feast, <ref target=pb385 type=pageref>385</ref>;
  <lb>styles Thursday Mub&amacr;rak-&shbarb;amba, <ref target=pb386 type=pageref>386</ref>;
  <lb>wild plantain, <ref target=pb386 type=pageref>386</ref>;
  <lb>carrier-pigeons, <ref target=pb387 type=pageref>387</ref>;
  <lb>receives pomegranates from Mecca, <ref target=pb391 type=pageref>391</ref>;
  <lb>receives &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, and honours him, <ref target=pb393 type=pageref>393</ref>&ndash;5;
  <lb>opinion about bananas (plantains), <ref target=pb397 type=pageref>397</ref>;
  <lb>receives &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n&apos;s gifts, <ref target=pb399 type=pageref>399</ref>&ndash;401;
  <lb>goes to Gujarat, <ref target=pb401 type=pageref>401</ref>;
  <lb>seedless grapes, <ref target=pb404 type=pageref>404</ref>;
  <lb>hunting and good shot, <ref target=pb404 type=pageref>404</ref>;
  <lb>at Dh&amacr;r, <ref target=pb406 type=pageref>406</ref>&ndash;7;
  <lb>orders removal of iron column, <ref target=pb407 type=pageref>407</ref>;
  <lb>prescribes lukewarm water for elephants, <ref target=pb410 type=pageref>410</ref>;
  <lb>describes lotus, <ref target=pb412 type=pageref>412</ref>;
  <lb>liking for <hi>roh&umacr;</hi> fish, <ref target=pb414 type=pageref>414</ref>;
  <lb>at Cambay, <ref target=pb415 type=pageref>415</ref>;
  <lb>on board a <hi>&ghbarb;ur&amacr;b</hi>, <ref target=pb417 type=pageref>417</ref>;
  <lb>strikes new coins, <ref target=pb418 type=pageref>418</ref>;
  <lb>leaves Cambay, <ref target=pb419 type=pageref>419</ref>;
  <lb>describes Gujarat fish and vegetables, <ref target=pb419 type=pageref>419</ref>;
  <lb>fishes, <ref target=pb436 type=pageref>436</ref>;
  <lb>expels Sewras, <ref target=pb438 type=pageref>438</ref>;
  <lb>bestows books on Gujarat &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;s, <ref target=pb439 type=pageref>439</ref>;
  <lb>charities, <ref target=pb440 type=pageref>440</ref>;
  <lb>at Do&hdotb;ad, <ref target=pb445 type=pageref>445</ref>.

<p>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; Beg, Turkm&amacr;n, also called J&amacr;n-sip&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb398 type=pageref>398</ref>.

<p>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, eldest son of &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka, gets title of &Shbarb;amsu-d-d&imacr;n, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Gujarat as father&apos;s deputy, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>;
  <lb>sends jewels, <ref target=pb163 type=pageref>163</ref>;
  <lb>sends silver throne, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>;
  <lb>offering of, <ref target=pb283 type=pageref>283</ref>;
  <lb>goes to Allahabad, <ref target=pb289 type=pageref>289</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Behar, <ref target=pb373 type=pageref>373</ref>.

<p><hi>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr; &ayin;i&tumlb;r</hi> (otto of roses), <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;rp&umacr;r, hunting-box, <ref target=pb90 type=pageref>90</ref>&ndash;1. (The Shakhopura of the maps; it is also called Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&amacr;b&amacr;d; it is west of Lahore.)

<p><hi>J&amacr;&hamza;i-nam&amacr;z</hi> (prayer carpets), <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>.

<p>Jaitp&umacr;r, zamindar of, <ref target=pb389 type=pageref>389</ref>;
  <lb>pardoned, <ref target=pb391 type=pageref>391</ref>;
  <lb>comes to Court, <ref target=pb403 type=pageref>403</ref>.

<p><hi>J&amacr;la</hi> (a raft), described, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>.

<p>Jal&amacr;l Gakkhar, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>.

<p>Jal&amacr;l&amacr;b&amacr;d mentioned, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>.

<pb id=pb479 n=479><p>Jal&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n Mas&ayin;&umacr;d, death of, and his mother&apos;s devotion, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>.

<p>Jal&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n Muhammad, <hi>see</hi> Akbar.

<p>Jal&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n, Mu&zumlb;affar &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m, <ref target=pb79 type=pageref>79</ref>;
  <lb>death and account of, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>.

<p>J&amacr;ln&amacr;pur, &Shbarb;&amacr;h Mur&amacr;d&apos;s death at, <ref target=pb34 type=pageref>34</ref>.

<p>J&amacr;m, the, zamindar, <ref target=pb443 type=pageref>443</ref>.

<p>Jam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n &Hdotb;usain Anj&umacr; (or Inj&umacr;), author of dictionary, rewarded, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>;
  <lb>sent to advise &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>&ndash;1;
  <lb>&ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n asks for, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>;
  <lb>received at Bijapur, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>;
  <lb>report by, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>;
  <lb>arrives from Bijapur, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>;
  <lb>offering of, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>;
  <lb>styled &ayin;A&zdotb;udu-d-daulah, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>;
  <lb>his son, <ref target=pb404 type=pageref>404</ref>.

<p>Jam&imacr;l Beg gets 7,000 rupees to distribute among the cavalry, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref> (apparently the Waz&imacr;r Jam&imacr;l of p. <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref> of text).

<p>J&amacr;n Beg (or &Khbarb;&amacr;n Beg), Waz&imacr;ru-l-mulk, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref> and n. 3;
  <lb>hears of flight of &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>;
  <lb>death of, <ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref>.

<p>J&amacr;n&imacr;, M&imacr;rz&amacr;, account of, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>;
  <lb>death at Burhanpur, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>.

<p>Jarric, Du, quoted, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref> n. 2, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref> n. 1, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref> n. 1.

<p>Jay Singh, son of Mah&amacr; Singh, <ref target=pb386 type=pageref>386</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb389 type=pageref>389</ref>.

<p>Jay Singh Deo, Raja, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>.

<p>Jeddah, customs at, <ref target=pb417 type=pageref>417</ref>.

<p>Jesus, carving of, on a filbert, <ref target=pb201 type=pageref>201</ref>.

<p><hi>Jharokha</hi> (exhibition window), <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref>, <ref target=pb242 type=pageref>242</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p><hi>Jh&imacr;ng&amacr;</hi>, insect (?), <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref> and n. 2.

<p>J&imacr;j&imacr; Ang&amacr;, mother of &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>.

<p><hi>Jilaud&amacr;r</hi> cruelly put to death, <ref target=pb164 type=pageref>164</ref>.

<p><hi>Jilaw&amacr;na</hi> (bridle-money), perquisite of, abolished, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref> and n. 3.

<p>Jitmal shot by Akbar at Chitor, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>.

<p>Jog&imacr; and tiger, strange story, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>.

<p>Jog&imacr; near Pushkar, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Jugglers, <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>.

<p>Jumna River, source of, <ref target=pb4 type=pageref>4</ref>.

<p>Jumping competition, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>.

<p>J&umacr;tra, a mistake for &Khbarb;uzistan (<hi>see</hi> Addenda), <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref> n. 3, <ref target=pb162 type=pageref>162</ref> note.


<div2 id=ixk>
<head>K</head>

<p>Kab&imacr;r, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Sal&imacr;m&apos;s family, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at.

<p>Kabul, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r visits, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>;
  <lb>fruits, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>.

<p><hi>Kah&amacr;rs</hi> (bearers) hamstrung, <ref target=pb164 type=pageref>164</ref>.

<pb id=pb480 n=480><p>Kalind, hill, source of the Jumna, <ref target=pb4 type=pageref>4</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;liy&amacr;daha, description of, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>.

<p>Kaly&amacr;n, son of R&amacr;ja Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, i.e. Patr D&amacr;s, misconduct and punishment, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>.

<p>Kaly&amacr;n, R&amacr;ja, official of Bengal, offering of, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>;
  <lb>governor of Orissa, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>;
  <lb>promoted and made R&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>;
  <lb>inquiry about, <ref target=pb389 type=pageref>389</ref>;
  <lb>pronounced innocent, <ref target=pb390 type=pageref>390</ref>, <ref target=pb402 type=pageref>402</ref>.

<p>Kaly&amacr;n, R&amacr;ja, of &Imacr;dar, <ref target=pb427 type=pageref>427</ref>.

<p>Kaly&amacr;n R&amacr;y, superintendent of port, Cambay, <ref target=pb417 type=pageref>417</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;ma, river, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>.

<p>Kam&amacr;l Chaudhar&imacr;, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>.

<p>Kam&amacr;l &Khbarb;&amacr;n, slave, died, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>, <ref target=pb150 type=pageref>150</ref>.

<p>Kam&amacr;l, <hi>qar&amacr;wul</hi> (huntsman) at tiger-hunt, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>;
  <lb>styled &Shbarb;ik&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb409 type=pageref>409</ref>.

<p>Kam&amacr;l, Sayyid, failed to stop &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>;
  <lb>distinguished himself in battle, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>.

<p>Kam&amacr;lu-d-d&imacr;n Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr;, Persian ambassador, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;mil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of &Khbarb;urram, son of &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;mr&amacr;n&apos;s garden, Lahore, <ref target=pb68 type=pageref>68</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;nkriya tank, A&hdotb;mad&amacr;b&amacr;d, <ref target=pb420 type=pageref>420</ref>.

<p>Karam Chand, son of Jagann&amacr;th, promoted, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>.

<p>Karam Sen R&amacr;&tdotb;hor, promoted, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>.

<p>Karams&imacr;, wife of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, mother of Bih&amacr;r B&amacr;n&umacr; Begam, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref> and n. 3.

<p>Karan, son of R&amacr;n&amacr; Amar Singh, <ref target=pb26 type=pageref>26</ref>, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>;
  <lb>waits on &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, <ref target=pb276 type=pageref>276</ref> (cf. Roe), <ref target=pb277 type=pageref>277</ref>&ndash;8;
  <lb>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r exhibits his skill to, <ref target=pb286 type=pageref>286</ref>&ndash;7;
  <lb>receives present of 50,000 rupees, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>;
  <lb>gifts to, <ref target=pb289 type=pageref>289</ref>;
  <lb>gets leave, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>;
  <lb>returns, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>;
  <lb>statue of, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;r&imacr;z, near Herat, melons of, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>, <ref target=pb422 type=pageref>422</ref>, <ref target=pb435 type=pageref>435</ref>.

<p>Kashmir, account of, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>;
  <lb>strange births at, <ref target=pb406 type=pageref>406</ref>;
  <lb>plague in, <ref target=pb442 type=pageref>442</ref>.

<p>Kaukab, son of Qamar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, whipped and imprisoned, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>;
  <lb>escapes and is recaptured, <ref target=pb440 type=pageref>440</ref>;
  <lb>account of, <ref target=pb440 type=pageref>440</ref>&ndash;2.

<p><hi>Kaukab-i-&tumlb;&amacr;li&ayin;</hi>, silver coin, <ref target=pb11 type=pageref>11</ref>;
  <lb>large coin (though called a <hi>muhr</hi>, it probably was silver) given to Persian ambassador, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>.

<p><hi>Keo&rdotb;&amacr;</hi>, flower (<hi>Pandanus</hi>), <ref target=pb6 type=pageref>6</ref>.

<p>Ke&shbarb;o D&amacr;s, son of R&amacr;y Kalah, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>.

<pb id=pb481 n=481><p>Ke&shbarb;o D&amacr;s M&amacr;r&umacr;, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref> n. 3;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>, <ref target=pb79 type=pageref>79</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb390 type=pageref>390</ref>, <ref target=pb410 type=pageref>410</ref>;
  <lb>horse sent to Bengal for, <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>.

<p><hi>Ketk&imacr;</hi>, flower (<hi>Pandanus</hi>), <ref target=pb6 type=pageref>6</ref> and n. 4.

<p>&Khbarb;al&imacr;lu-llah, son of &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n, pays his respects, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>;
  <lb>account of, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>;
  <lb>death of, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;&amacr;n &ayin;&Amacr;lam, title of Bar&khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;r, son of &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;m&amacr;n, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>;
  <lb>appointed ambassador to Persia, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>;
  <lb>&Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s allows him to smoke, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>;
  <lb>sends melons, <ref target=pb435 type=pageref>435</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See also</hi> Bar&khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;r.

<p>&Khbarb;&amacr;n A&ayin;&zumlb;am, <hi>see</hi> &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka.

<p>&Khbarb;&amacr;n Daur&amacr;n, <hi>see</hi> &Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg.

<p>&Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n Lod&imacr;, original name P&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, received title of &Sdotb;al&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>;
  <lb>character of, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>;
  <lb>given title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n, <ref target=pb128 type=pageref>128</ref>;
  <lb>skill as shot, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>;
  <lb>raised to rank of 5,000, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>;
  <lb>offers to go to Deccan, <ref target=pb161 type=pageref>161</ref>;
  <lb>sent for, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>;
  <lb>takes leave, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb372 type=pageref>372</ref>.

<p><hi>&Khbarb;&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>, value of coin, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref> and n. 2.

<p>&Khbarb;&amacr;njar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, brother of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n F&imacr;r&umacr;z Jang, promoted, <ref target=pb163 type=pageref>163</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;&amacr;njar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of &Sdotb;&amacr;li&hdotb;, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;&amacr;n&Khbarb;&amacr;n&amacr;n, <hi>see</hi> &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m.

<p>Khar, village, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref> and n. 1.

<p>Kharatara, Sewra sect, <ref target=pb437 type=pageref>437</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;aw&amacr;&sdotb;&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, jagird&amacr;r of Qanauj, death of, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;i&zdotb;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, late ruler of &Khbarb;&amacr;ndesh, presents to, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;i&zdotb;r&amacr;b&amacr;d, apparent source of Jumna, <ref target=pb4 type=pageref>4</ref>, <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;&umacr;b-Allah, son of &Shbarb;&amacr;h-b&amacr;z Kamb&umacr;, promoted, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>.

<p><hi>Kh&umacr;n-p&amacr;ra</hi> (congestion of blood), <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref> and n. 1.

<p>&Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr; conquered, <ref target=pb433 type=pageref>433</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;urram, B&amacr;b&amacr;, name of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, birth of, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>;
  <lb>brought up by Ruqayya Begam, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>;
  <lb>rank of 8,000, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>;
  <lb>lunar weighment in &Umacr;rta garden, <ref target=pb115 type=pageref>115</ref>;
  <lb>reveals &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s plot, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>;
  <lb>given fief, <ref target=pb132 type=pageref>132</ref>;
  <lb>jewels given to, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>;
  <lb>marriage present of 50,000 rupees sent to house of Mu&zumlb;affar &Hdotb;usain M&imacr;rz&amacr;, whose daughter was engaged to &Khbarb;urram, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>;
  <lb>marriage took place, <ref target=pb180 type=pageref>180</ref>;
  <lb>his rank increased from 8,000 to 10,000, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>;
  <lb>helps An&umacr;p R&amacr;y with tiger, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>;
  <lb>rank increased <pb id=pb482 n=482>from 10,000 to 12,000, <ref target=pb217 type=pageref>217</ref>;
  <lb>his marriage with I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d&apos;s daughter Arjumand B&amacr;n&umacr; (Mumt&amacr;z-ma&hdotb;all), <ref target=pb224 type=pageref>224</ref> and n. 2;
  <lb>makes New Year&apos;s offering, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>;
  <lb>sent to visit Akbar&apos;s tomb on anniversary, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>;
  <lb>sent against the R&amacr;n&amacr;, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>;
  <lb>his success, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>, <ref target=pb276 type=pageref>276</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb277 type=pageref>277</ref>;
  <lb>birth of son (D&amacr;r&amacr;), <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>;
  <lb>presents rare ruby, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>;
  <lb>promoted to equal rank with Parw&imacr;z, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>;
  <lb>his weighment, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>;
  <lb>tastes wine, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>;
  <lb>increase of rank, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>;
  <lb>leaves for Deccan, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>;
  <lb>gets title of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>;
  <lb>enters Burhanpur, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>;
  <lb>given a dress, <ref target=pb377 type=pageref>377</ref>;
  <lb>birth of daughter (R&umacr;&shbarb;an&amacr;r&amacr;), <ref target=pb389 type=pageref>389</ref>;
  <lb>his reception, <ref target=pb393 type=pageref>393</ref>&ndash;4;
  <lb>increased rank, <ref target=pb395 type=pageref>395</ref>;
  <lb>gives ruby, etc., to Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb399 type=pageref>399</ref>;
  <lb>his weighment, <ref target=pb424 type=pageref>424</ref>;
  <lb>presents fruit, <ref target=pb439 type=pageref>439</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;urram, son of &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka, promoted from 2,000 to 2,500, <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref>;
  <lb>appointed governor of Sorath or J&umacr;nagadh, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>;
  <lb>gets title of K&amacr;mal &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;&umacr;&shbarb;-&khbarb;abar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title given to &Shbarb;ams&imacr;, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;usrau, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n, eldest son of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, given a lakh of rupees, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>;
  <lb>his flight, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>;
  <lb>cause of mother&apos;s suicide, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>;
  <lb>attendants seized, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>;
  <lb>attacks Lahore, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>;
  <lb>defeated, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>;
  <lb>captured, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>;
  <lb>brought before Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb68 type=pageref>68</ref>, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>, <ref target=pb72 type=pageref>72</ref>;
  <lb>chains removed, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>;
  <lb>his plot, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>;
  <lb>his daughter inspected by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>;
  <lb>son born to him by daughter of &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka and called by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Buland-a&khbarb;tar, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>;
  <lb>personated by one Qu&tumlb;b, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>;
  <lb>note about blinding, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref> n. 1, <ref target=pb222 type=pageref>222</ref>;
  <lb>allowed to pay his respects, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>;
  <lb>forbidden to do so, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>;
  <lb>has a son by the daughter of Muq&imacr;m, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>;
  <lb>made over to &Amacr;&sdotb;af &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;usrau Beg, slave of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n (&ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m), came from Patna and waited on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;usrau B&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg, waited on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r and received dress, <pb id=pb483 n=483> etc., <ref target=pb206 type=pageref>206</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to Sarkar of Mewar and promoted, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>;
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain, the brother of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Mu&hdotb;ammad Q&amacr;sim.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja.

<p>&Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Beg M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Sdotb;afaw&imacr;, governor of Ahmadnagar, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>;
  <lb>good conduct, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>;
  <lb>his adopted son &Sdotb;ali&hdotb;, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Jah&amacr;n, title of D&umacr;st Mu&hdotb;ammad, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>;
  <lb>makes offering, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>;
  <lb>ordered to make a house, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb217 type=pageref>217</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>, <ref target=pb286 type=pageref>286</ref>, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>;
  <lb>sent to make inquiries, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>;
  <lb>his melon-bed, <ref target=pb241 type=pageref>241</ref>;
  <lb>5,000 rupees given him for distribution, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>;
  <lb>offering, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;w&amacr;ja M&imacr;r, son of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb388 type=pageref>388</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;w&amacr;ja T&amacr;b&umacr;t, or &lsquo;coffin &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja,&rsquo; mummy of, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref>.

<p>&Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r, brother of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, receives title of Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>.

<p>Kif&amacr;yat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Hdotb;usain, <ref target=pb376 type=pageref>376</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb439 type=pageref>439</ref>.

<p>Ki&shbarb;an Chand, son of Mota R&amacr;ja, made officer of 1,000, <ref target=pb128 type=pageref>128</ref>.

<p>Ki&shbarb;an Chand, son of the Raja of Nagarkot, made a Raja, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>.

<p>Ki&shbarb;an D&amacr;s, accountant of stables, received the rank of 1,000, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>.

<p>Ki&shbarb;an Singh, did good service, and was wounded in fight with R&amacr;n&amacr;, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>;
  <lb>death of, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>&ndash;3.

<p><hi>Ki&shbarb;mi&shbarb;&imacr;</hi>, kind of grape, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref> n. 1.

<p>Ki&shbarb;war &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n, governor of Rohtas, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>;
  <lb>presented twenty-two elephants, <ref target=pb165 type=pageref>165</ref>;
  <lb>promoted and made faujd&amacr;r of Uch, <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>;
  <lb>killed, <ref target=pb210 type=pageref>210</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See also</hi> Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;.

<p>Ko&tdotb; T&imacr;r&amacr;h, <ref target=pb8 type=pageref>8</ref> kos from Jal&amacr;l&amacr;b&amacr;d, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>K&umacr;ch Bih&amacr;r, two daughters of this zamindar who had been taken by Isl&amacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, together with a son and ninety-four elephants, produced before Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>;
  <lb>zamindar of, <ref target=pb443 type=pageref>443</ref>, <ref target=pb444 type=pageref>444</ref>.

<p>Kumaon, Raja of, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>.


<pb id=pb484 n=484>
<div2 id=ixl>
<head>L</head>

<p>L&amacr;ch&imacr;n Q&amacr;q&shbarb;&amacr;l, <ref target=pb434 type=pageref>434</ref>.

<p>Lachm&imacr; Nar&amacr;yan of K&umacr;ch Bih&amacr;r, <ref target=pb443 type=pageref>443</ref>, <ref target=pb444 type=pageref>444</ref>.

<p>Lahore, grapes abundant at, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>;
  <lb>news from, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p>Lakhm&imacr; Chand, Raja of Kumaon, brought to Court, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>.

<p>La&ayin;l Kal&amacr;want died, and a concubine poisoned herself, <ref target=pb150 type=pageref>150</ref>.

<p>L&amacr;la Beg, styled B&amacr;z Bah&amacr;dur, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> B&amacr;z Bah&amacr;dur.

<p>Lank&umacr; Pandit, envoy of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb162 type=pageref>162</ref>.

<p>La&shbarb;kar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Mu&ayin;taqid &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>Leyden, J., quoted, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref> note, etc.

<p>Lotus flowers, <ref target=pb412 type=pageref>412</ref>.

<p>Lunar weighing, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>, etc.


<div2 id=ixm>
<head>M</head>


<p>M&amacr;dan, blacksmith, of M&amacr;nd&umacr;, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;dho Singh, brother&apos;s son of M&amacr;n Singh, presented with flag, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>;
  <lb>misconduct, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>.

<p>Maghs, brought by H&umacr;&shbarb;ang, account of, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr; Singh, grandson of M&amacr;n Singh, son of Jagat Singh, promoted to 2,000, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to Banga&shbarb;, and R&amacr;m D&amacr;s made his tutor, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Banga&shbarb;, <ref target=pb118 type=pageref>118</ref>;
  <lb>given standard, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>;
  <lb>sent to quell Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t of B&amacr;ndh&umacr;, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>;
  <lb>does not succeed M&amacr;n Singh, but is promoted, and given Garha-Katanga in fief, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref> and n. 3;
  <lb>receives title of Raja, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>;
  <lb>sends elephants, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>;
  <lb>sons wait upon Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>;
  <lb>dies of drink, <ref target=pb377 type=pageref>377</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;ban, parganah assigned to Mah&amacr;bat, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;bat, title of Zam&amacr;na Beg, son of &Ghbarb;ay&umacr;r Beg of Kabul, promoted, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref> and n. 3;
  <lb>appointed to pursue &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>;
  <lb>given 15,000 rupees, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb77 type=pageref>77</ref>;
  <lb>promoted to 3,000 with 2,500 horse, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>;
  <lb>received robe of honour, etc., <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>;
  <lb>sent for to Court, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>;
  <lb>brings tiger-cub, <ref target=pb164 type=pageref>164</ref>;
  <lb>pays his respects, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb217 type=pageref>217</ref>;
  <lb>fief given to, <pb id=pb485 n=485>241;
  <lb>prepares halting-place at Samonagar, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>;
  <lb>ordered to bring &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka from Udaipur, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>;
  <lb>presents offering, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>;
  <lb>receives charge of A&hdotb;mad Beg, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>;
  <lb>splendid offerings, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>;
  <lb>given horse, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>;
  <lb>given presents, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>;
  <lb>pay reduced, <ref target=pb385 type=pageref>385</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to Kabul, <ref target=pb402 type=pageref>402</ref>.

<p>Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d, Sultan of Ghazni, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref> and note.

<p>Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d Kam&amacr;ngar, saint, Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n&apos;s respect for, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref> and note.

<p>Maht&amacr;b garden at Kabul, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>.

<p>Makt&umacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, librarian, verse by, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>.

<p>Malik &ayin;Ambar, defeats &ayin;Abdu-llah, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>;
  <lb>attempt to assassinate, <ref target=pb275 type=pageref>275</ref>;
  <lb>defeat of, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>, <ref target=pb373 type=pageref>373</ref>.

<p>Malwa, account of, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;n, R&amacr;ja, released, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>;
  <lb>loyalty of, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>;
  <lb>killed, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;n Singh, son (originally nephew) of Bhagw&amacr;n D&amacr;s, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>;
  <lb>maternal uncle to &Khbarb;usrau, confirmed in government of Bengal, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>;
  <lb>sent a dress of honour, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>;
  <lb>built house at &Hdotb;asan Abd&amacr;l, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r after being sent for six or seven times, <ref target=pb137 type=pageref>137</ref>;
  <lb>character, <ref target=pb138 type=pageref>138</ref>;
  <lb>presents <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref> elephants, <ref target=pb138 type=pageref>138</ref>;
  <lb>presented with a horse, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>;
  <lb>sends sixty elephants, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>;
  <lb>gets leave on appointment to Deccan, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>;
  <lb>sword presented to, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>;
  <lb>summoned to Court, <ref target=pb208 type=pageref>208</ref>;
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;n Singh Darb&amacr;r&imacr; at battle at A&hdotb;mad&amacr;b&amacr;d, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;n Singh Sew&rdotb;&amacr;, <ref target=pb437 type=pageref>437</ref>&ndash;8.

<p>M&amacr;nd&umacr;, account of, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>&ndash;5, <ref target=pb381 type=pageref>381</ref>, <ref target=pb384 type=pageref>384</ref>;
  <lb>storm at, <ref target=pb383 type=pageref>383</ref>.

<p>Mangl&imacr; or Mankal&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, receives horse and dagger, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>.

<p>Mangoes received from Kair&amacr;na, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Manohar Sekh&amacr;wat Kachhw&amacr;ha, son of Raja Lonkaran, Persian scholar and poet, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>;
  <lb>death of, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>.

<p>Man&sdotb;&umacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, nephew of Waz&imacr;ru-l-mulk (J&amacr;n Beg), <ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref>.

<p>Manucci, quoted, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref> n. 1, etc.

<p><hi>M&amacr;r&khbarb;&umacr;r</hi> (wild goat), <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>.

<p>Maryam Mak&amacr;n&imacr; (&Hdotb;am&imacr;da B&amacr;n&umacr;), Akbar&apos;s mother, given charge of <pb id=pb486 n=486> &Shbarb;&amacr;hz&amacr;da &Khbarb;&amacr;nam, <ref target=pb34 type=pageref>34</ref>;
  <lb>presents ruby to Akbar, <ref target=pb409 type=pageref>409</ref>.

<p>Maryam-zam&amacr;n&imacr;, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s mother, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r pays his respects to her at Dahr, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>;
  <lb>solar weighing takes place in her house, <ref target=pb78 type=pageref>78</ref>, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>, and Parw&imacr;z&apos;s marriage, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>, and Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s marriage, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Agra, <ref target=pb401 type=pageref>401</ref>.

<p>Mas&imacr;&hdotb;u-z-zam&amacr;n, title of &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m &Sdotb;adr&amacr;, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>.

<p>Mas&ayin;&umacr;d, son of Sa&ayin;d, poet, his couplet, <ref target=pb4 type=pageref>4</ref> and n. 2.

<p>Mas&ayin;&umacr;d Beg Hama&zbarb;&amacr;n&imacr;, promoted, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>.

<p>Ma&ayin;&sdotb;&umacr;m, Wakil of the Khankhanan, brings MS., <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>.

<p>Mathura, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>.

<p>Matricide, punishment of, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p>Maud&umacr;d Chi&shbarb;t&imacr;, styled Chi&shbarb;t&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb379 type=pageref>379</ref>.

<p>Melons, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>;
  <lb>one from near Fat&hdotb;p&umacr;r weighed <ref target=pb33 type=pageref>33</ref> seers, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>;
  <lb>of K&amacr;r&imacr;z, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>Mihtar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, account of, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>;
  <lb>death of, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>.

<p>Mihtar Sa&ayin;&amacr;dat, name of P&imacr;&shbarb;rau &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> P&imacr;&shbarb;rau.

<p>M&imacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr;, calligrapher, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref> and note.

<p>M&imacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr;, son of Far&imacr;d&umacr;n, death, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>.

<p>M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n, son of &Khbarb;al&imacr;lu-llah, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>;
  <lb>gifts to, <ref target=pb389 type=pageref>389</ref>.

<p>M&imacr;r M&imacr;r&amacr;n, son of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, belonging to Deccan army, presents ruby, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>, <ref target=pb388 type=pageref>388</ref>.

<p>M&imacr;r&amacr;n, <hi>see</hi> &Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n.

<p>M&imacr;r&amacr;n, Sayyid, his monument to his father, <ref target=pb436 type=pageref>436</ref>.

<p>M&imacr;rz&amacr;, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n, son of &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, character, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>;
  <lb>came from Deccan, <ref target=pb201 type=pageref>201</ref>.

<p><hi>M&imacr;y&amacr;n T&umacr;&tumlb;&imacr;</hi>, speech of a bird, <ref target=pb138 type=pageref>138</ref>.

<p>Mohan D&amacr;s, son of Raja Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>

<p>Monkey, strange, <ref target=pb216 type=pageref>216</ref>;
  <lb>story of affection of a goat for young monkey, <ref target=pb445 type=pageref>445</ref>.

<p>Mosque of Ahmadabad, <ref target=pb424 type=pageref>424</ref>&ndash;5.

<p>Mu&hamza;arri&khbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of Mull&amacr;-i-Taqiyy&amacr; &Shbarb;&umacr;star&imacr;, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p>Mu&ayin;a&zumlb;&zumlb;am, <hi>see</hi> B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d.

<p>Mub&amacr;rak &ayin;Arab, possessor of land in Khuzistan, etc., <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref> and note, and <ref target=pb162 type=pageref>162</ref> and note.

<p>Mub&amacr;rak &Khbarb;&amacr;n Saz&amacr;wal promoted, <ref target=pb289 type=pageref>289</ref>;
  <lb>gifts to, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>.

<p>Mub&amacr;rik Bu&khbarb;&amacr;r&imacr;, his tomb, <ref target=pb436 type=pageref>436</ref>.

<pb id=pb487 n=487><p>Mub&amacr;riz &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;usain, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb409 type=pageref>409</ref>.

<p>Mu&hdotb;ammad Am&imacr;n, Maul&amacr;n&amacr;, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>.

<p>Mu&hdotb;ammad Beg, styled &Zbarb;&umacr;-l-faq&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb275 type=pageref>275</ref>. He is mentioned under this title by Sir T. Roe.

<p>Mu&hdotb;ammad Beg, <hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb162 type=pageref>162</ref>.

<p>Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m, uncle of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, his sons, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref> and n. 2;
  <lb>planted an apricot-tree, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>.

<p>Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, uncle of H&amacr;&shbarb;im &Khbarb;&amacr;n, superintendent of kitchen, sent to Kashmir to act for his nephew, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>;
  <lb>returns, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>;
  <lb>personal appearance and death of, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>.

<p>Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain Cheleb&imacr;, sent to make purchases in Persia, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>&ndash;8.

<p>Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain M&imacr;rz&amacr;, rebel, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>;
  <lb>put to death, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>.

<p>Mu&hdotb;ammad Ri&zdotb;&amacr;, ambassador of King of Persia, <ref target=pb374 type=pageref>374</ref>;
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb398 type=pageref>398</ref>.

<p>Mu&hdotb;ammad Ri&zdotb;&amacr; Sabzw&amacr;r&imacr; given 20,000 rupees for distribution, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>.

<p>Mu&hdotb;ammad &Shbarb;&amacr;h, emperor, reinstitutes Chain of Justice, <ref target=pb7 type=pageref>7</ref> n. 1.

<p>Mu&hdotb;ammad Taq&imacr;, diwan, sent to bring &ayin;Az&imacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n&apos;s family from Mandes&umacr;r, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>.

<p>Muhr, gold(?) coin of 1,000 tolas weight given Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr;, ambassador of Persia, called <hi>kaukab-i-&tumlb;&amacr;l&imacr;&ayin;</hi>, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>.

<p>M&umacr;&ayin;&imacr;nu-d-d&imacr;n Chi&shbarb;t&imacr;, of Ajmir, great saint, <ref target=pb1 type=pageref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb34 type=pageref>34</ref>, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref> n. 2, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.

<p>Mu&ayin;izzu-l-mulk, Sayyid of B&amacr;&khbarb;arz, in charge of buildings, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>;
  <lb>recalls &Shbarb;ar&imacr;f, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>;
  <lb><hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>;
  <lb>fief-holder of Nakodar, <ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref>;
  <lb>ill and miserable, <ref target=pb164 type=pageref>164</ref>;
  <lb>diwan of Kabul, and promoted, <ref target=pb172 type=pageref>172</ref>;
  <lb>at Kabul, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>;
  <lb>came from Kabul with his sons, <ref target=pb222 type=pageref>222</ref>.

<p>Mukarram &Khbarb;&amacr;n son of Mu&ayin;&amacr;&zumlb;&zumlb;am &Khbarb;&amacr;n, given a flag, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>;
  <lb>his offering, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>;
  <lb>conquers &Khbarb;&umacr;rd&amacr;, <ref target=pb433 type=pageref>433</ref>.

<p>Mu&khbarb;li&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> of Deccan, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>;
  <lb>punished, <ref target=pb382 type=pageref>382</ref>.

<p>Mu&khbarb;li&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<p>Mu&khbarb;t&amacr;r Beg, diwan of Parw&imacr;z, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>.

<p>Mulberry fruited at Lahore in December-January, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>.

<p><hi>M&umacr;lsar&imacr;</hi>, flower, <ref target=pb6 type=pageref>6</ref>.

<p><hi>M&umacr;m&imacr;y&amacr;</hi>, bitumen, <ref target=pb238 type=pageref>238</ref>.

<pb id=pb488 n=488><p>Mun&ayin;im &Khbarb;&amacr;n, his house, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>.

<p>M&umacr;nis &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Mihtar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, presents jug of jade, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>.

<p>Muqarrab &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; &Hdotb;asan, son of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Bah&amacr; or Bh&imacr;n&amacr;, account of, <ref target=pb27 type=pageref>27</ref>;
  <lb>brings D&amacr;niy&amacr;l&apos;s children from Burhanpur, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref>, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>;
  <lb>sends Emperor tapestry, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>;
  <lb>sends picture of T&imacr;m&umacr;r, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>&ndash;4 and note;
  <lb>brings curiosities from Cambay and Surat, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>;
  <lb>a widow complains against, <ref target=pb172 type=pageref>172</ref>;
  <lb>brings turkey, etc., from Goa, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>;
  <lb>governor of Delhi, <ref target=pb224 type=pageref>224</ref>;
  <lb>bleeds Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>;
  <lb>gets standard and drums, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>;
  <lb>presents of, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>;
  <lb>New Year&apos;s offering, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>;
  <lb>sent to inquire into affair at Surat, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>;
  <lb>arrives from Gujarat, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>;
  <lb>presents Abyssinian elephant, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>;
  <lb>made governor of Gujarat, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>;
  <lb>sends mangoes, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>;
  <lb>presents pearl, <ref target=pb415 type=pageref>415</ref>, <ref target=pb424 type=pageref>424</ref>, <ref target=pb432 type=pageref>432</ref>;
  <lb>has presents, <ref target=pb435 type=pageref>435</ref>.

<p>Muq&imacr;m, styled by Akbar Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, confirmed in appointment, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>;
  <lb>made co-vizier, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>;
  <lb>diwan of Bengal, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>;
  <lb>dismissed, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>;
  <lb>presents sixty elephants, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>.

<p>Mur&amacr;d, M&imacr;rz&amacr;, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Rustam, styled Iltif&amacr;t &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>.

<p>Mur&amacr;d, &Shbarb;&amacr;h, second son of Akbar, nicknamed <hi>Pah&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>, birth and account of, <ref target=pb34 type=pageref>34</ref>;
  <lb>styled &Shbarb;&amacr;hz&amacr;da maghf&umacr;r after death, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>.

<p>Mur&shbarb;id Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, musketeer, abets drinking of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, <ref target=pb35 type=pageref>35</ref>.

<p>Murta&zdotb;&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Dakhan&imacr;, distinguished fencer, receives title of Warzi&shbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p>Mu&sdotb;&tumlb;af&amacr; Beg, ambassador from Persia, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>;
  <lb>gets a N&umacr;r-jah&amacr;n&imacr; muhr, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>;
  <lb>takes leave, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p>Mu&sdotb;&tumlb;af&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>;
  <lb>name of &Zdotb;&imacr;yar&hamza;u-d-d&imacr;n Qazw&imacr;n&imacr;, <hi>which see</hi>.

<p>Mu&ayin;tamid &Khbarb;&amacr;n, author of the Iqb&amacr;l-n&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref> note;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>.

<p>Mu&ayin;taqid &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Iftikh&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, distinguished in battle with &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>;
  <lb>had been <pb id=pb489 n=489>diwan of Bengal, brought &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n&apos;s sons, etc., to Court, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>;
  <lb>produced offering of twenty-five elephants, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>;
  <lb>made <hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>;
  <lb>buys house in Agra, his misfortunes, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>;
  <lb>went as <hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> to Banga&shbarb;, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>;
  <lb>defeats A&hdotb;d&amacr;d Afghan, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>&ndash;4;
  <lb>received title of La&shbarb;kar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>;
  <lb>offering of, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb377 type=pageref>377</ref>;
  <lb>made diwan of Deccan, <ref target=pb406 type=pageref>406</ref>;
  <lb>sent to distribute alms, <ref target=pb432 type=pageref>432</ref>.

<p>Mu&zumlb;affar, Sultan of Gujarat, alleged son of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d, originally Nann&umacr;, causes disturbance in Gujarat, <ref target=pb429 type=pageref>429</ref>&ndash;31.

<p>Mu&zumlb;affar &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m, <hi>see</hi> &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Mu&zumlb;affar.

<p>Mu&zumlb;affar Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; B&amacr;q&imacr; Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n, belonged to the Tar&khbarb;&amacr;n family of Scinde, waits upon Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb434 type=pageref>434</ref> and n. 2.


<div2 id=ixn>
<head>N</head>

<p>N&amacr;d &ayin;Al&imacr; Maid&amacr;n&imacr;, <ref target=pb198 type=pageref>198</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>;
  <lb>offerings, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref> (the entry here should be <hi>d&amacr;na ki&shbarb;</hi>, marten-skins);
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p>Nag&imacr;na garden, Ahmadabad, <ref target=pb435 type=pageref>435</ref>.

<p>Naj&imacr;bu-n-nis&amacr; or Fa&khbarb;ru-n-nis&amacr;, sister of Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m and aunt of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, death of, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p>Nakodar, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>, <ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref> and n. 1.

<p>Nandanah, red deer of, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> I.G., xviii, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>.

<p>Nann&umacr; or Nab&umacr;, styled Mu&zumlb;affar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb429 type=pageref>429</ref>.

<p>Naq&imacr;b &Khbarb;&amacr;n, of Qazw&imacr;n, son of &ayin;Abdu-l-La&tumlb;&imacr;f, original name &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n, death of, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>;
  <lb>buried beside his wife, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>.

<p>Nary&amacr;d, parganah in Gujarat, <ref target=pb415 type=pageref>415</ref>.

<p>N&amacr;&sdotb;iru-d-d&imacr;n, &Khbarb;alj&imacr;, buildings made by, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>;
  <lb>evil behaviour, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>&ndash;7, <ref target=pb408 type=pageref>408</ref>, <ref target=pb409 type=pageref>409</ref>.

<p>Na&sdotb;ru-llah, given rank of 700 with <ref target=pb400 type=pageref>400</ref> horse, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>.

<p>Nathu M&amacr;l, R&amacr;ja of Manjholi, <ref target=pb79 type=pageref>79</ref> and n. 4;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>.

<p><hi>Nauras</hi>, musical compositions of &ayin;&Amacr;dil &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref> and n. 1.

<p>Nau&shbarb;ahr, fort on the K&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>.

<p>Naw&amacr;zi&shbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of Sa&ayin;du-llah, son of Sa&ayin;&imacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>, <ref target=pb444 type=pageref>444</ref>;
  <lb>leave to depart, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>, <ref target=pb443 type=pageref>443</ref>.

<pb id=pb490 n=490><p>Na&zumlb;ar-j&imacr;v&imacr;, brought Akbar news of Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n&apos;s death, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref> (&lsquo;j&imacr;v&imacr;&rsquo; should be &lsquo;ch&umacr;l&imacr;&rsquo;).

<p>Na&zumlb;&imacr;r&imacr; of N&imacr;sh&amacr;p&umacr;r, poet, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref> (Rieu, ii. 817b).

<p>New Year Feasts, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb138 type=pageref>138</ref>, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>, <ref target=pb165 type=pageref>165</ref>, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb206 type=pageref>206</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>News-writers, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p>N&imacr;l&amacr;b, river (Indus), <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>.

<p>N&imacr;lgaw, Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s cruelty in connection with hunt of, <ref target=pb164 type=pageref>164</ref>;
  <lb>incident about shooting one, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>.

<p>Ni&ayin;matu-llah, married to J&amacr;nish Begam, sister of &Tumlb;ahm&amacr;sp, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>.

<p>Ni&zumlb;&amacr;m, Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n&apos;s librarian, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>.

<p>Ni&zumlb;&amacr;m, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, brings pomegranates, <ref target=pb391 type=pageref>391</ref>.

<p>Ni&zumlb;&amacr;m, of Shiraz, story-teller, receives 3,000 rupees, <ref target=pb77 type=pageref>77</ref>.

<p>Ni&zumlb;&amacr;m Thaneswari, dismissed to Mecca, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>.

<p>Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n, historian, <ref target=pb420 type=pageref>420</ref>.

<p>Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n Auliy&amacr;, saint, <ref target=pb169 type=pageref>169</ref>.

<p>Ni&zumlb;&amacr;mu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>.

<p>N&umacr;r-ba&khbarb;t elephant, <ref target=pb396 type=pageref>396</ref>, <ref target=pb410 type=pageref>410</ref>, <ref target=pb418 type=pageref>418</ref>.

<p>N&umacr;r Gaj, name of elephant and its description, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>

<p>N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref> note;
  <lb>name first mentioned in T&umacr;zuk, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>;
  <lb>makes presents to Karan, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>;
  <lb>name changed from N&umacr;r-ma&hdotb;all to N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>;
  <lb>R&amacr;msar belongs to, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>;
  <lb>shoots a bird, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>;
  <lb>shoots four tigers, <ref target=pb375 type=pageref>375</ref>;
  <lb>given parganah of &Tdotb;o&ddotb;&amacr;, <ref target=pb380 type=pageref>380</ref>;
  <lb>gives a feast, <ref target=pb385 type=pageref>385</ref>;
  <lb>entertains &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, <ref target=pb397 type=pageref>397</ref>;
  <lb>receives presents from &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, <ref target=pb401 type=pageref>401</ref>.

<p>N&umacr;r-n&amacr;ma, poem, <ref target=pb222 type=pageref>222</ref>.

<p>N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n, son of &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;u-d-d&imacr;n &ayin;Al&imacr; &Amacr;&sdotb;af-&Khbarb;&amacr;n (No. ii), plots with &Khbarb;usrau and is put to death, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>&ndash;3.

<p>N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r P&amacr;d&shbarb;&amacr;h, title assumed, <ref target=pb3 type=pageref>3</ref>.

<p>N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad, Naq&shbarb;band&imacr;, father of Sal&imacr;ma Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Begam, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>.

<p>N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Qul&imacr;, promoted, <ref target=pb418 type=pageref>418</ref>.



<div2 id=ixo>
<head>O</head>

<p>Oranges, <ref target=pb423 type=pageref>423</ref>.

<p>Orders about fiefs, <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref>;
  <lb>about compensation to peasants for damage to crops, <ref target=pb163 type=pageref>163</ref>, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>;
  <lb>about Am&imacr;rs, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref>.


<pb id=pb491 n=491>
<div2 id=ixp>
<head>P</head>


<p>Pah&amacr;&rdotb;, son of &Ghbarb;azn&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n, matricide, put to death, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p><hi>Pah&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>, <hi>see</hi> Mur&amacr;d &Shbarb;&amacr;h.

<p>Pahluw&amacr;n Bah&amacr;&hamza;u-d-d&imacr;n, <ref target=pb445 type=pageref>445</ref>.

<p>Pal&amacr;s-tree, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>.

<p>P&amacr;mp&umacr;r, village in Kashmir, famous for saffron, <ref target=pb92 type=pageref>92</ref>.

<p><hi>Pandanus</hi>, <hi>see</hi> <hi>Keo&rdotb;&amacr;</hi> and <hi>Ketk&imacr;</hi>.

<p>Pandits, religious discussion with, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>, <ref target=pb33 type=pageref>33</ref>.

<p>Panipat, battles at, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>.

<p><hi>Parg&amacr;la, fargul</hi> (kind of garment), <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref> and note, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>.

<p>Parw&imacr;z, Sultan, son of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, sent against R&amacr;n&amacr;, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>;
  <lb>used to keep Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&apos;s seal, <ref target=pb18 type=pageref>18</ref>;
  <lb>birth of, <ref target=pb18 type=pageref>18</ref>&ndash;19 and n. 1;
  <lb>directions to, <ref target=pb26 type=pageref>26</ref>;
  <lb>report from about R&amacr;n&amacr;, ordered to Agra, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>;
  <lb>joins Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>, <ref target=pb74 type=pageref>74</ref>;
  <lb>given sword, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>;
  <lb>130,000 rupees sent as marriage present for Mur&amacr;d &Shbarb;&amacr;h&apos;s daughter, betrothed to Parw&imacr;z, <ref target=pb78 type=pageref>78</ref>;
  <lb>solar weighing of, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Deccan, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>;
  <lb>ruby worth 60,000 rupees given to, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>;
  <lb>&Khbarb;andesh, Berar, and &Amacr;s&imacr;r, given to, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>;
  <lb>pearl rosary given to, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>;
  <lb>unsatisfactory results, <ref target=pb161 type=pageref>161</ref>;
  <lb><hi>ta&khbarb;t&imacr;</hi> sent to, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>;
  <lb>failure of, <ref target=pb183 type=pageref>183</ref>;
  <lb>son born to, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>;
  <lb>offering of, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>.

<p>Pat&amacr;, properly Tap&amacr;, a Sewra sect, <ref target=pb437 type=pageref>437</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Addenda.

<p>Path&amacr;n Mi&sdotb;r, 1,000 rupees given to, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>.

<p>Patr D&amacr;s, styled R&amacr;y R&amacr;y&amacr;n, receives title of Raja Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t and made Master of Ordnance, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to Gujarat, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>;
  <lb>honoured, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>.

<p>P&amacr;yanda &Khbarb;&amacr;n Moghul, to receive a jagir, <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>;
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>.

<p>Peaches, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>, <ref target=pb118 type=pageref>118</ref>.

<p>Pe&shbarb; Bul&amacr;&ghbarb;, fort, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p><hi>Ph&umacr;l ka&tdotb;&amacr;ra</hi>, what is it, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref> and note.

<p>P&imacr;m Bah&amacr;dur, killed, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>.

<p>Pineapples, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>.

<p>P&imacr;r, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, built mosque at Mairtha, <ref target=pb241 type=pageref>241</ref> (<hi>see also</hi> Addenda);
  <lb>given 1,000 rupees, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p>P&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <hi>see</hi> &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n Lod&imacr;.

<p>P&imacr;&shbarb;rau &Khbarb;&amacr;n, styled Mihtar Sa&ayin;&amacr;dat, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>;
  <lb>came from Persia with Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>;
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>&ndash;50.

<pb id=pb492 n=492><p>Pitl&amacr;d, parganah in Gujarat, <ref target=pb415 type=pageref>415</ref>.

<p>Plague, outbreak of, in Panjab, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>;
  <lb>in Kashmir, <ref target=pb442 type=pageref>442</ref>.

<p>Plantains (bananas), wild, at M&amacr;nd&umacr;, <ref target=pb383 type=pageref>383</ref>, <ref target=pb386 type=pageref>386</ref>&ndash;7;
  <lb>golden plantains (<hi>s&omacr;na-kela</hi>), <ref target=pb397 type=pageref>397</ref>.

<p>Poplar, white, <ref target=pb7 type=pageref>7</ref>.

<p>Portuguese Viceroy, defeat of, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.

<p>Price, Major, quoted, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref> n. 2;
  <lb>23 n. 1 and <hi>passim</hi>.

<p>Prith&imacr; Chand, son of R&amacr;y Manohar, promoted, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p>Prosperity, four causes of, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>.

<p>Pushkar, lake and temples, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>;
  <lb>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r visits, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p>P&umacr;n P&umacr;n, fight on bank of, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>.



<div2 id=ixq>
<head>Q</head>


<p>Qab&umacr;lah, town in Bet-J&amacr;landhar D&umacr;&amacr;b, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>.

<p>Qadam, Afghan, deserts, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>.

<p><hi>Qamarg&amacr;h</hi> (ring-hunt), <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>&ndash;4.

<p>Qandahar, in Afghanistan, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, etc.;
  <lb>in Deccan, <ref target=pb179 type=pageref>179</ref>.

<p>Qar&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Turkm&amacr;n promoted, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>.

<p>Qar&amacr;cha &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Am&imacr;r of Hum&amacr;y&umacr;n, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>.

<p>Q&amacr;sim, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, came from Transoxiana and waited on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r and given 12,000 rupees, <ref target=pb241 type=pageref>241</ref>.

<p>Q&amacr;sim &hamza;Al&imacr;, styled Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Day&amacr;nat.

<p>Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, disagrees with his brother Isl&amacr;m, sent for, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>;
  <lb>gets present, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>;
  <lb>sends elephant, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>;
  <lb>dress of honour sent to, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>;
  <lb>dismissed, <ref target=pb373 type=pageref>373</ref>.

<p>Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Mu&hdotb;ammad, servant of Akbar, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>.

<p>Qil&imacr;j (should be Qul&imacr;j) &Khbarb;&amacr;n, appointed to Gujarat, and given a lakh of rupees, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>;
  <lb>recalled to Court, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>;
  <lb>ordered a fief, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>;
  <lb>buries &Hdotb;ak&imacr;m Mu&zumlb;affar, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>;
  <lb>governor of Lahore, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>;
  <lb>promoted to 6,000 with 5,000 horse, sent to Kabul, <ref target=pb198 type=pageref>198</ref>&ndash;9;
  <lb>quarrels with Amirs, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>&ndash;1;
  <lb>death of, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>; <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>.

<p><hi>Qir&amacr;n-i-na&hdotb;s&imacr;n</hi> (unlucky conjunction of planets), <ref target=pb172 type=pageref>172</ref>.

<p>Qizilb&amacr;&shbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n disgraced, <ref target=pb289 type=pageref>289</ref>.

<p>Qu&tumlb;b personates &Khbarb;usrau at Patna, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>.

<pb id=pb493 n=493><p>Qu&tumlb;b &ayin;&Amacr;lam, father of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam, <ref target=pb421 type=pageref>421</ref>;
  <lb>his shrine, <ref target=pb436 type=pageref>436</ref>.

<p>Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka, given dagger worth 6,000 rupees, <ref target=pb77 type=pageref>77</ref>;
  <lb>promoted and appointed to Bengal, <ref target=pb78 type=pageref>78</ref>;
  <lb>mother dies, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>&ndash;5;
  <lb>killed by &Shbarb;&imacr;r-afgan at Bardwan, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>.

<p>Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad, maker of K&amacr;nkriya tank, <ref target=pb420 type=pageref>420</ref>.

<p>Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n  Mu&hdotb;ammad &Khbarb;&amacr;n killed at Baroda, <ref target=pb431 type=pageref>431</ref>.

<p>Qu&tumlb;bu-l-mulk, king of Golconda, <ref target=pb433 type=pageref>433</ref>.


<div2 id=ixr>
<head>R</head>


<p>Racing, horse, at Kabul, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>.

<p><hi>R&amacr;e bel</hi> (flower), <ref target=pb6 type=pageref>6</ref> and n. 2.

<p>R&amacr;gho D&amacr;s Kachhw&amacr;ha killed at Ahmadabad battle, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>.

<p>Ra&hdotb;man-d&amacr;d, younger son of Khankhanan, given suitable mansab, <ref target=pb222 type=pageref>222</ref>.

<p>Railings in the public audience hall, construction of, <ref target=pb242 type=pageref>242</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;jmahendra, Raja of, <ref target=pb433 type=pageref>433</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;j&umacr;, Sikh, put to death, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>.

<p><hi>R&amacr;kh&imacr;</hi> (bracelet), custom of wearing, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;m Chand, Band&imacr;lah, capture of, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>;
  <lb>released, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>;
  <lb>Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r marries his daughter, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;m D&amacr;s Kachhw&amacr;ha, promoted to rank of 3,000, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>;
  <lb>to receive fief, <ref target=pb128 type=pageref>128</ref>;
  <lb>at tiger-hunt, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>;
  <lb>sent to accompany &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb201 type=pageref>201</ref>&ndash;2;
  <lb>given Ranthanb&umacr;r, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>;
  <lb>advice unheeded, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>;
  <lb>sent to adjust disputes between Qil&imacr;j and Amirs, given horse, robes, and 30,000 rupees for expenses, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>;
  <lb>reported death of, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>;
  <lb>made Raja, <ref target=pb379 type=pageref>379</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb418 type=pageref>418</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;msar in Ajmir, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;n&amacr; Amar Singh, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Amar Singh.

<p><hi>Rang</hi>, kind of goat (ibex), description of, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p>Rankatta, village, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref> and n. 1.

<p>Ra&shbarb;&imacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb402 type=pageref>402</ref>.

<p>Ratan, son of Bhoj-h&amacr;ra, waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r and presents valuable elephants, given title of Sarbuland R&amacr;y, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>.

<p>Rau&shbarb;an&imacr;s or T&amacr;r&imacr;k&imacr;s, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref> and n. 1.

<p>R&amacr;wal S&amacr;l Darb&amacr;ri, given flags, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>.

<pb id=pb494 n=494><p>R&amacr;wal Samars&imacr;, of B&amacr;nsw&amacr;la, <ref target=pb379 type=pageref>379</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;walpind&imacr;, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>;
  <lb>hunting at, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;y &ayin;Al&imacr; Bhat&imacr;, killed in Gujarat, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;y M&amacr;n, captain of Khidmatiya, <ref target=pb414 type=pageref>414</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;y R&amacr;y Singh, son of R&amacr;y Kaly&amacr;n M&amacr;l, of Bikanir, has charge of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Hdotb;usain, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>;
  <lb>promoted to 5,000, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>;
  <lb>his rebellion, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>;
  <lb>his misconduct in matter of &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>&ndash;1;
  <lb>comes to Court and is pardoned, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref> and n. 1;
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb217 type=pageref>217</ref>;
  <lb>wished to make S&umacr;raj Singh his heir, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>;
  <lb>his folly, <ref target=pb438 type=pageref>438</ref>.

<p>Regulations (<hi>dast&umacr;ru-l-&ayin;amal</hi>), <ref target=pb7 type=pageref>7</ref>&ndash;10, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref>.

<p>Release of prisoners, <ref target=pb10 type=pageref>10</ref> and n. 2.

<p><hi>Riq&amacr;&ayin;</hi> (kind of writing), <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref> and n. 2.

<p>Rodgers, C. J., quoted, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref> n. 1.

<p>Roht&amacr;s, fort in Panj&amacr;b, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref> and n. 2.

<p><hi>Roh&umacr;</hi> (fish), <ref target=pb414 type=pageref>414</ref>.

<p>Ruby, historic, <ref target=pb409 type=pageref>409</ref>.

<p>R&umacr;dar, Raja of Kumaon, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>.

<p>R&umacr;&hdotb;u-llah, <ref target=pb390 type=pageref>390</ref>;
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb391 type=pageref>391</ref>.

<p>Ruknu-d-d&imacr;n, Afghan &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, styled &Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, promoted, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>;
  <lb>given Peshawar, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>;
  <lb>given Gujrat in Panjab, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r at Dhaka in Khaibar, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>;
  <lb>dies of drink, <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>&ndash;5.

<p>R&umacr;p &Khbarb;aw&amacr;&sumlb;&sumlb;, founder of R&umacr;pb&amacr;s, presented offering, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>;
  <lb>gets title of &Khbarb;aw&amacr;&sdotb;&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n and made faujd&amacr;r of Qanuj, <ref target=pb224 type=pageref>224</ref>.

<p>R&umacr;pb&amacr;s, near Agra, hunting at, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>;
  <lb>numerous antelopes at, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>;
  <lb>afterwards called Am&amacr;n&amacr;b&amacr;d, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Ruqayya Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Begam, daughter of Hind&amacr;l and first wife of Akbar, given a garden, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>;
  <lb>brings up &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jahan, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>;
  <lb>visits father&apos;s tomb at Kabul, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>.

<p>R&umacr;&shbarb;an&amacr;r&amacr; Begam, birth of, <ref target=pb389 type=pageref>389</ref>.

<p>Rustam, M&imacr;rz&amacr;, son of M&imacr;rz&amacr; Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Hdotb;usain, dress of honour sent to, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>;
  <lb>given government of Scinde, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>;
  <lb>sent by Akbar to Deccan, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>;
  <lb>sent by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r to Scinde, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref> and n. 1;
  <lb>misconduct, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>;
  <lb>pardoned, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>;
  <lb>accident to, <ref target=pb403 type=pageref>403</ref>.

<p>Rustam &Khbarb;&amacr;n, servant of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, <ref target=pb405 type=pageref>405</ref>;
  <lb>given garden, <ref target=pb427 type=pageref>427</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb435 type=pageref>435</ref>.

<p>Rustam-&Khbarb;&amacr;nb&amacr;r&imacr;, <ref target=pb426 type=pageref>426</ref>.

<pb id=pb495 n=495><p>R&umacr;z-afz&umacr;n, of Behar, becomes Muhammadan, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>.

<p>R&umacr;zbih&amacr;n &Shbarb;ir&amacr;z&imacr;, Mull&amacr;, given money to expend on anniversary of &Shbarb;ai&khbarb; Sal&imacr;m, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>.


<div2 id=ixs>
<head>S</head>

<p>S&amacr;bar Mah&imacr; (S&amacr;barmat&imacr;), river in Gujarat, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>.

<p>&Sumlb;&amacr;bit &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <hi>see</hi> Day&amacr;nat &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>Sa&ayin;du-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Sa&ayin;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n, promoted, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>;
  <lb>given elephant, <ref target=pb183 type=pageref>183</ref>;
  <lb>styled Naw&amacr;zi&shbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>.

<p>&Sdotb;&amacr;diq &Khbarb;&amacr;n, promoted, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>, <ref target=pb372 type=pageref>372</ref>;
  <lb>built monastery, <ref target=pb425 type=pageref>425</ref>.

<p>&Sdotb;adr Jah&amacr;n, M&imacr;r&amacr;n, to produce deserving poor before Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb10 type=pageref>10</ref>;
  <lb>promoted to 4,000, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>;
  <lb>given a lakh of d&amacr;ms for distribution, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>;
  <lb>made &Sdotb;adr, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>;
  <lb>promoted to 5,000, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p>&Sdotb;afdar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb164 type=pageref>164</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>;
  <lb>comes from Bihar, <ref target=pb200 type=pageref>200</ref>, <ref target=pb242 type=pageref>242</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Kashmir, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>;
  <lb>dismissed, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p>Saffron, cultivation of, <ref target=pb93 type=pageref>93</ref>.

<p>&Sdotb;af&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> of Gujarat, <ref target=pb420 type=pageref>420</ref>, <ref target=pb439 type=pageref>439</ref>.

<p>&Sdotb;af&imacr; M&imacr;rz&amacr;, son of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;Abb&amacr;s, murder of, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>;
  <lb>reason for killing him, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.

<p>Saf&imacr;d-sang, meadow of, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>&Sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ib qir&amacr;n&imacr;</hi>, title of Tim&umacr;r, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>.

<p><hi>&Sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;ib&imacr;</hi>, kind of grape, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>.

<p>Sa&ayin;id &Khbarb;&amacr;n, officer appointed to Kashmir, and opportunely reaches Lahore, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>.

<p>Sa&ayin;&imacr;d &Khbarb;&amacr;n Cha&ghbarb;atai, governor of Panjab, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>;
  <lb>report from, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>;
  <lb>directed to bring M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr; to Court, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>.

<p>Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of &ayin;Al&imacr; A&sdotb;&ghbarb;ar B&amacr;rha son of Sayyid Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d B&amacr;rha, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>;
  <lb>received seventeen wounds, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>;
  <lb>promoted and made faujd&amacr;r of Hisar, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>;
  <lb>receives standard, <ref target=pb172 type=pageref>172</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>;
  <lb>death from cholera, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>.

<p>Saif &Khbarb;&amacr;n Kokalt&amacr;sh, brother of Zain &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka, killed in battle, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>.

<p>Sal&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n Lod&imacr;, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p>Sal&amacr;mu-llah, Arab, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref> and n. 3;
  <lb>sent to Deccan, <ref target=pb162 type=pageref>162</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <pb id=pb496 n=496>285, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>;
  <lb>styled &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>, <ref target=pb397 type=pageref>397</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;lb&amacr;han comes with D&amacr;niy&amacr;l&apos;s elephants, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>. (In Mu&hdotb;ammad H&amacr;di&apos;s preface, p. <ref target=pb11 type=pageref>11</ref>, he is called Raja Sh&amacr;lb&amacr;han.)

<p>S&amacr;li&hdotb;, adopted son of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Beg &Sdotb;afaw&imacr;, styled &Khbarb;anjar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>.

<p>Sal&imacr;m, &Shbarb;ai&khbarb;, of S&imacr;kr&imacr;, promises Akbar three sons, <ref target=pb2 type=pageref>2</ref>.

<p>Sal&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of &Shbarb;ir &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb137 type=pageref>137</ref>.

<p>Salima Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Begam, daughter of N&umacr;ru-d-d&imacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad and Gul-ru&khbarb; Begam, account of, and death, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref> and n. 2;
  <lb>gave name of <hi>&ayin;i&tumlb;r Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r&imacr;</hi> to otto of roses, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>.

<p>Sal&imacr;mgadh, fort in the Jumna, <ref target=pb137 type=pageref>137</ref>.

<p>Sandal-tree, <ref target=pb7 type=pageref>7</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;ng&amacr;, R&amacr;n&amacr;, defeated by B&amacr;bar, <ref target=pb4 type=pageref>4</ref>, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;ngor village, beauty of, and name changed to Kam&amacr;lp&umacr;r, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>.

<p>Sangr&amacr;m, hill Raja, kills R&amacr;ja M&amacr;n, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>.

<p>Sangr&amacr;m, name of Akbar&apos;s gun, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>.

<p>Sangr&amacr;m, zamindar of Bihar, killed, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>.

<p><hi>S&amacr;ras</hi> (birds), account of, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>.

<p>Sarbuland R&amacr;y promoted, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>, <ref target=pb406 type=pageref>406</ref>, <ref target=pb411 type=pageref>411</ref>.

<p>Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <hi>see</hi> Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja.

<p>Sar-far&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, grandson of Mu&sdotb;&amacr;hib Beg (apparently should be Sar-&amacr;fr&amacr;z), <ref target=pb413 type=pageref>413</ref>.

<p>Sarkhej, <ref target=pb428 type=pageref>428</ref>.

<p><hi>Sati</hi>, custom of, referred to, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>.

<p>Sayyid Mu&hdotb;ammad, descendant of &Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam, <ref target=pb422 type=pageref>422</ref>.

<p>Sayyids of B&amacr;rha, bearing of, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>.

<p>Sensitive plant, <ref target=pb443 type=pageref>443</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;&amacr;dm&amacr;n, son of &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka, made &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;&amacr;h &ayin;&Amacr;lam, saint, raises the dead, <ref target=pb421 type=pageref>421</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;&amacr;h Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, governor of Qandahar, promoted to 5,000, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>;
  <lb>reports intended Persian attack on fort, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>;
  <lb>bravery of, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>;
  <lb>defends fort and makes it over to Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>;
  <lb>comes to &Shbarb;or, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref> and n. 2;
  <lb>recovers from illness, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>;
  <lb>account of, <ref target=pb126 type=pageref>126</ref>;
  <lb>styled &Khbarb;&amacr;n-daur&amacr;n, <ref target=pb128 type=pageref>128</ref>;
  <lb>offering of, <ref target=pb206 type=pageref>206</ref>, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>&ndash;8;
  <lb>originally <pb id=pb497 n=497>sent to Qandahar by Akbar, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>;
  <lb>present to, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>;
  <lb>defeats A&hdotb;d&amacr;d, Afghan, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>;
  <lb>transferred to Sind, <ref target=pb397 type=pageref>397</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;&amacr;h Begam, title given to &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s mother, daughter of Bhagw&amacr;n D&amacr;s, takes poison, <ref target=pb56 type=pageref>56</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;&amacr;h-bud&amacr;&ghbarb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb382 type=pageref>382</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, <hi>see</hi> &Khbarb;urram, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n.

<p>&Shbarb;&amacr;h M&imacr;rz&amacr;, rebel, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;&amacr;h-naw&amacr;z &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> &Imacr;raj.

<p>&Shbarb;&amacr;h Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;ram, seizes Hem&umacr;, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>;
  <lb>his garden, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;&amacr;h &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at, birth of, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>;
  <lb>he was born on the eve of Sunday, the 12th Tir = June 24th, 1616.

<p>Shahabad in R&amacr;jputana, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref> and note.

<p>&Shbarb;ahr-&amacr;r&amacr; garden at Kabul, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>&ndash;6, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;ahr-b&amacr;n&umacr;, aunt of B&amacr;bar, maker of &Shbarb;ahr-&amacr;r&amacr; garden, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, M&imacr;rz&amacr;, of Badakhshan, son of Ibr&amacr;h&imacr;m, grandson of Sulaim&amacr;n, account of, <ref target=pb26 type=pageref>26</ref>&ndash;7;
  <lb>given province of Malwa, <ref target=pb27 type=pageref>27</ref>;
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>;
  <lb>account of family, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>;
  <lb>his seven children brought to Court, <ref target=pb137 type=pageref>137</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;ahry&amacr;r, son of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref> and n. 1;
  <lb>comes from Gujarat, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;&amacr;hz&amacr;da &Khbarb;&amacr;nam, daughter of Akbar, born three months after Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, made over to Maryam Mak&amacr;n&imacr;, <ref target=pb34 type=pageref>34</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of Kab&imacr;r Chi&shbarb;t&imacr;, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>;
  <lb>in battle at Ahmadabad, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>;
  <lb>promoted and sent to Bengal, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>;
  <lb>account of battle against &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n, Afghan, <ref target=pb209 type=pageref>209</ref>&ndash;14;
  <lb>receives title of Rustam-zam&amacr;n, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>;
  <lb>death of, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of Sal&amacr;mu-llah, Arab (<hi>which see</hi>), <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb439 type=pageref>439</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n Dakhan&imacr;, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;akaru-n-nis&amacr;, daughter of Akbar, character of, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>.

<p><hi>&Shbarb;&amacr;&khbarb;band</hi>, a kind of fence, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;ams &Khbarb;&amacr;n Gakkhar, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;amsu-d-d&imacr;n, son of &ayin;Az&imacr;z Koka, made Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r Qul&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <hi>which see</hi>.

<p>&Shbarb;amsu-d-d&imacr;n &Khbarb;w&amacr;f&imacr;, officer of Akbar, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;ankar, R&amacr;n&amacr;, son of Udai Singh, cousin of the R&amacr;n&amacr;, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <pb id=pb498 n=498>112;
  <lb>given 12,000 and 30,000 rupees, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>;
  <lb>his son promoted, <ref target=pb178 type=pageref>178</ref>;
  <lb>temple destroyed, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>;
  <lb>tank, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;&amacr;p&umacr;r, son of &Khbarb;w&amacr;jag&imacr; &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>;
  <lb>perhaps a nephew of &Ghbarb;iy&amacr;&sumlb;, but Ma&hamza;&amacr;&sumlb;ir, i, <ref target=pb180 type=pageref>180</ref>, calls him son of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daula, and it may be another name for I&ayin;tiq&amacr;d.

<p>&Shbarb;arafu-d-d&imacr;n K&amacr;&shbarb;&ghbarb;ar&imacr; promoted, <ref target=pb372 type=pageref>372</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Bangash, <ref target=pb408 type=pageref>408</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;ar&imacr;f, son of I&ayin;tim&amacr;du-d-daula, plots with &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>;
  <lb>put to death, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;ar&imacr;f &Amacr;mul&imacr;, account of, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>&ndash;8;
  <lb>receives 2,000 rupees, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>;
  <lb>9,000 rupees, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>;
  <lb>and 12,000 rupees, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;ar&imacr;f &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Am&imacr;ru-l-umar&amacr;, son of &ayin;Abdu-&sdotb;-&Sdotb;amad, couplet by, <ref target=pb11 type=pageref>11</ref>;
  <lb>account of, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref> and n. 2, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>;
  <lb>seal entrusted to, <ref target=pb18 type=pageref>18</ref>;
  <lb>remark of, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>&ndash;6;
  <lb>employed to quell riot, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>;
  <lb>directed to pursue &Khbarb;usrau, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>;
  <lb>recalled, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>;
  <lb>left ill at Lahore, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>;
  <lb>at Attock, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>;
  <lb>gets worse, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>;
  <lb>recovers, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r at Chand&amacr;lah, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Deccan, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>;
  <lb>verse by, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>;
  <lb>death in Deccan, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;auq&imacr;, mandolin-player, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;ih&amacr;bu-d-d&imacr;n A&hdotb;mad &Khbarb;&amacr;n, officer of Akbar, <ref target=pb430 type=pageref>430</ref>&ndash;1.

<p>&Shbarb;&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, ruler of Bengal, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>.

<p>&Shbarb;&imacr;r-afgan, title given by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r to &ayin;Al&imacr; Qul&imacr; Ist&amacr;jl&umacr;, husband of N&umacr;r-Jah&amacr;n, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>;
  <lb>account of him and of his killing Qu&tumlb;bu-d-d&imacr;n, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>&ndash;15.

<p>&Shbarb;ukru-llah, Mull&amacr;, &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n&apos;s diwan, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Af&zdotb;al &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>Shy&amacr;m R&amacr;m, riot by, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>.

<p>Shy&amacr;m Singh, cousin of Umr&amacr;, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>&ndash;1;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb222 type=pageref>222</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>.

<p>Sikandar Mu&ayin;&imacr;n, ordered to build fort at Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;rp&umacr;r (&Shbarb;ai&khbarb;&umacr;p&umacr;ra), <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>;
  <lb>helps Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r to shoot nilgaw, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>;
  <lb>buried at R&amacr;n&amacr; &Shbarb;ankar&apos;s tank, having died at Udaipur, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p>Sikandar Munsh&imacr;, author, <ref target=pb427 type=pageref>427</ref>.

<p>Sikandra, building of, <ref target=pb152 type=pageref>152</ref>.

<p>Siyar al-muta&hamza;a&khbarb;&khbarb;ir&imacr;n, quoted, <ref target=pb7 type=pageref>7</ref> note.

<p>Solar weighments, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p>Spider, large, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref>.

<pb id=pb499 n=499><p>Squirrel, flying, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>.

<p>Statues, marble, of R&amacr;n&amacr; and son, erected at Agra, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Subh Karan, maternal uncle of R&amacr;n&amacr; Amar, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>.

<p>Sub&hdotb;&amacr;n Qul&imacr;, Turk, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>.

<p>Sudras, Hindu caste, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>.

<p><hi>Sufra</hi> net, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p>Sulaim&amacr;n Beg, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Fid&amacr;&hamza;&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n, M&imacr;rz&amacr;, son of &Shbarb;&amacr;hru&khbarb;, favoured by Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>.

<p>Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram, i.e. &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, <hi>see</hi> &Khbarb;urram B&amacr;b&amacr;.

<p>Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d, son-in-law of &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja Ab&umacr;-l-&hdotb;asan, <ref target=pb382 type=pageref>382</ref>.

<p>Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Ma&hdotb;m&umacr;d B&imacr;gara, <ref target=pb429 type=pageref>429</ref>.

<p>Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Shbarb;&amacr;h, Afghan, shot to death with arrows, <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>.

<p>Sul&tumlb;&amacr;nu-n-nis&amacr;, eldest child of Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref> and n. 1.

<p>Sundar D&amacr;s, styled R&amacr;y R&amacr;y&amacr;n, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>;
  <lb>styled Bikram&amacr;j&imacr;t, <ref target=pb402 type=pageref>402</ref>.

<p>S&umacr;raj Mal, son of R&amacr;ja B&amacr;so, <ref target=pb283 type=pageref>283</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>, <ref target=pb388 type=pageref>388</ref>, <ref target=pb393 type=pageref>393</ref>.

<p>S&umacr;raj Singh, R&amacr;ja, maternal uncle of &Khbarb;urram B&amacr;b&amacr; (&Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n), <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>&ndash;1;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>;
  <lb>fights with his brother, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Deccan, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p>S&umacr;raj Singh, son of R&amacr;y R&amacr;y Singh, younger brother of Dul&imacr;p, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>;
  <lb>offering of, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>&ndash;3, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>;
  <lb>presents elephants, <ref target=pb289 type=pageref>289</ref>;
  <lb>given one in, return, <ref target=pb290 type=pageref>290</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>.

<p>Sur&khbarb;&amacr;b, discovery of plot at, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p>Sylhet, eunuchs in, <ref target=pb150 type=pageref>150</ref>.


<div2 id=ixt>
<head>T</head>


<p>Ta&hdotb;ayyur &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>. The name appears as B&amacr;&khbarb;tar or Chattar in I.O. MSS.

<p>&Tumlb;&amacr;hir, <hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> of Bengal, makes offering, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>.

<p>&Tumlb;&amacr;hir Beg, styled Mu&khbarb;li&sdotb; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> of the Ahadis, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>;
  <lb><hi>ba&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;</hi> of Deccan, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>.

<p>&Tumlb;ahm&amacr;sp, king of Persia, anecdote of, <ref target=pb124 type=pageref>124</ref>;
  <lb>gives sister in marriage to Ni&ayin;matu-llah, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>.

<p>Tahm&umacr;ra&sumlb;, son of D&amacr;niy&amacr;l, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>;
  <lb>marries Bih&amacr;r B&amacr;n&umacr;, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref> n. 3.

<p>T&amacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n Tariy&amacr;n&imacr;, <ref target=pb422 type=pageref>422</ref>.

<p>Ta&khbarb;ta Beg K&amacr;bul&imacr;, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>.

<p>T&amacr;n Sen Kal&amacr;want, musician, <ref target=pb413 type=pageref>413</ref>.

<pb id=pb500 n=500><p>Taqiyy&amacr; &Shbarb;&umacr;star&imacr;, Mull&amacr;, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p>Tarbiyat &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of &ayin;Abdu-r-Ra&hdotb;&imacr;m, son of Q&amacr;sim &Khbarb;&amacr;n, paymaster of Ahadis, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>;
  <lb>receives title of Tarbiyat, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>;
  <lb>made faujd&amacr;r of Alwar, <ref target=pb178 type=pageref>178</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>.

<p>Tard&imacr; Beg &Khbarb;&amacr;n, defeated and put to death, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>.

<p>Tard&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n D&imacr;w&amacr;na, at battle of Ahmadabad, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>.

<p>T&amacr;&shbarb; Beg Furj&imacr; (should be Q&umacr;rch&imacr;), styled by Akbar T&amacr;j &Khbarb;&amacr;n, promoted to 3,000, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>;
  <lb>left at Kabul, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>;
  <lb>removed from Multan, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb178 type=pageref>178</ref>, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to Bhakar, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>;
  <lb>death, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p><hi>Tas&umacr;</hi> (measure), <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref> and note. The note is wrong, instead of one-third of an inch read one and a third inch.

<p>T&amacr;t&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, offering of, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>.

<p>Tekchand, Raja of Kumaon, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>.

<p>Teufel, Dr., quoted, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref> n. 1.

<p>Thief, story of, <ref target=pb432 type=pageref>432</ref>.

<p>Tiger, strange story of, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>.

<p>Tigress&apos;s milk, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>.

<p>T&imacr;m&umacr;r, picture of, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>.

<p>To&ddotb;ar Mal, his son R&amacr;ja Kaly&amacr;n honoured, <ref target=pb402 type=pageref>402</ref>.

<p><hi>Tom&amacr;n</hi>, value of, <ref target=pb3 type=pageref>3</ref>.

<p><hi>Topch&imacr;</hi> (gunner), <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref> note.

<p><hi>Top&khbarb;&amacr;na-i-rik&amacr;b</hi>, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref> n. 3.

<p>Trees, large, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<p>Trimb&amacr;wat&imacr;, old name of Cambay, <ref target=pb416 type=pageref>416</ref>.

<p>Tughluq, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n Mu&hdotb;ammad, built fort at Dh&amacr;r, <ref target=pb407 type=pageref>407</ref>.

<p>Turkey, bird, account of, <ref target=pb216 type=pageref>216</ref>.

<p>Turquoises, <ref target=pb238 type=pageref>238</ref>.


<div2 id=ixu>
<head>U</head>

<p>&Umacr;d&amacr; R&amacr;m, <ref target=pb398 type=pageref>398</ref>&ndash;9;
  <lb>presents to, <ref target=pb408 type=pageref>408</ref>, <ref target=pb409 type=pageref>409</ref>.

<p>Ulu&ghbarb; Beg, a jade jar of, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p>&ayin;Umar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, grandfather of &Khbarb;&amacr;n Jah&amacr;n Lod&imacr;, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p>&ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n, Afghan<corr sic=".">,</corr> <ref target=pb209 type=pageref>209</ref>&ndash;15.

<p>&Umacr;ym&amacr;qs, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Aim&amacr;qs.


<div2 id=ixv>
<head>V</head>

<p>V&imacr;r-n&amacr;g, spring in Kashmir, <ref target=pb92 type=pageref>92</ref>, <ref target=pb93 type=pageref>93</ref>.


<pb id=pb501 n=501>
<div2 id=ixw>
<head>W</head>

<p>Wagtail&apos;s nest, <ref target=pb383 type=pageref>383</ref>.

<p>Wais&imacr;, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, diwan of Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n &Khbarb;urram, reveals &Khbarb;usrau&apos;s plot, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p>Waj&imacr;hu-d-d&imacr;n, Gujarati saint, <ref target=pb128 type=pageref>128</ref>, <ref target=pb425 type=pageref>425</ref>&ndash;6.

<p>Wal&imacr;, brother of &ayin;U&sumlb;m&amacr;n, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>.

<p>W&amacr;l&imacr;, M&imacr;rz&amacr;, son of Naj&imacr;bu-n-nis&amacr;, promoted, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p>Wal&imacr; B&imacr; &Umacr;zbeg, faujd&amacr;r of Multan, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>.

<p>Wal&imacr; Mu&hdotb;ammad &Khbarb;&amacr;n, ruler of T&umacr;r&amacr;n, <ref target=pb118 type=pageref>118</ref>.

<p>Waq&amacr;r&imacr;, pen-name of M&imacr;rz&amacr; &Ghbarb;&amacr;z&imacr;, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>.

<p>Waz&imacr;r Jam&imacr;l, promoted, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>;
  <lb>given 7,000 rupees, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>.

<p>Waz&imacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <hi>see</hi> Muq&imacr;m &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>Weights and measures, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>, <ref target=pb417 type=pageref>417</ref>.

<p>Wul&umacr;r Lake, Kashmir, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>&ndash;5.


<div2 id=ixy>
<head>Y</head>

<p>Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, brother of &ayin;Abdu-llah &Khbarb;&amacr;n Fir&umacr;z-jang and father of the historian K&amacr;mg&amacr;r &Hdotb;usain&imacr;, comes from Gujarat and gets title of Sard&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>.

<p>Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &ayin;Al&imacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n, Persian ambassador, receives muhr (silver?) of 1,000 tolas in weight, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>.

<p>Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r Beg Q&umacr;rch&imacr;, of Transoxiana, makes offering, <ref target=pb379 type=pageref>379</ref>;
  <lb>given presents and title, <ref target=pb386 type=pageref>386</ref>, <ref target=pb404 type=pageref>404</ref>.

<p>Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &Hdotb;usain Q&umacr;&shbarb;-begi, <ref target=pb404 type=pageref>404</ref>.

<p>Y&amacr;dg&amacr;r &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja of Samarkand, presents an album, <ref target=pb164 type=pageref>164</ref>.

<p>Ya&ayin;q&umacr;b Bada&khbarb;&shbarb;&imacr;, promoted for bravery and given title of &Khbarb;&amacr;n, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb372 type=pageref>372</ref>.

<pb id=pb502 n=502><p>Yildir&imacr;m B&amacr;yaz&imacr;d, Sultan of Turkey, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>.

<p>Y&umacr;suf and Zulai&khbarb;&amacr;, splendid copy, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref> and note.

<p>Y&umacr;suf &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of &Hdotb;usain Tukriyah, promoted, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>, <ref target=pb375 type=pageref>375</ref>, <ref target=pb404 type=pageref>404</ref>;
  <lb>sent to Deccan, <ref target=pb184 type=pageref>184</ref>;
  <lb>waited on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>;
  <lb>standard sent to, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.


<div2 id=ixz>
<head>Z</head>

<p>Zafar &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of Zain &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka, Attock given to, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>;
  <lb>does good service, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>;
  <lb>arranges ring-hunt, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>;
  <lb>receives dress, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>;
  <lb>promoted, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>;
  <lb>comes from Gujarat, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>;
  <lb>appointed to Behar, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>;
  <lb>sent for, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>;
  <lb>waits on Jah&amacr;ng&imacr;r, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<p>Z&amacr;hid, son of &Shbarb;aj&amacr;&ayin;at &Khbarb;&amacr;n, promoted, <ref target=pb405 type=pageref>405</ref>.

<p>Z&amacr;hid &Khbarb;&amacr;n, son of &Sumlb;&amacr;diq, promoted, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>;
  <lb>raised to rank of 2,000, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>;
  <lb>defeats Dul&imacr;p, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>;
  <lb>servant of &Shbarb;&amacr;h Jah&amacr;n, <ref target=pb441 type=pageref>441</ref>.

<p>Zain &Khbarb;&amacr;n Koka, Akbar&apos;s foster-brother, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>;
  <lb>built Nau&shbarb;ahr fort on the K&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>.

<p>Zain-lank&amacr;, island in Wul&umacr;r Lake, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>.

<p>Zainu-d-d&imacr;n, &Khbarb;w&amacr;ja, comes from Transoxiana, <ref target=pb289 type=pageref>289</ref>.

<p>Zainu-l-&ayin;&amacr;bid&imacr;n, Sul&tumlb;&amacr;n, king of Kashmir, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>.

<p>Zam&amacr;na Beg, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>.
  <lb><hi>See</hi> Mah&amacr;bat &Khbarb;&amacr;n.

<p>&Zdotb;iy&amacr;&hamza;u-d-d&imacr;n of Qazw&imacr;n, promoted and made accountant of stables, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>;
  <lb>receives title of Mu&sdotb;&tumlb;af&amacr; &Khbarb;&amacr;n and given parganah of Maldah in Bengal, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<p>&Zbarb;&umacr;-l-faq&amacr;r &Khbarb;&amacr;n, title of Muhammad Beg, <ref target=pb275 type=pageref>275</ref>.


</div1>


<divGen type=Colophon>


</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>

<!--

CHECKLIST (X = done; / = not applicable)

Initial cleanup

[ ] Check all pb-tags, and join lines
[ ] Move all footnotes in-line
[ ] Tag headers
[X] Fix all [** Proofer comments]
[ ] Start all paragraphs with the p-tag
[ ] Change b, sc, g tags to hi tags with correct attributes.
[ ] Change tb tags to milestone tags.
[ ] Fix multiple spaces in a row
[ ] Verify all paragraphs start with p-tag, also those starting with a tag.

TEI header

[X] Add TEI header.
[ ] Fill in details in TEI header
[ ] Verify Author dates and add to TEI header.
[ ] Document on-line scan sources.
[ ] Fill in description in noteStmt.
[ ] Fill in keywords / Subjects
[ ] Add auto-generated colophon divGen tag.
[ ] Fill in reference to LOC record (http://catalog.loc.gov/).
[ ] Fill in reference to OpenLibrary record (http://openlibrary.org).
[ ] Fill in reference to WorldCat record (source and work) (http://www.worldcat.org).
[ ] Generate unique epub-id. (http://www.guidgenerator.com/)

Verse

[ ] Tag all verse.
[ ] Apply proper indentation: rend=&ldquo;indent(2)&rdquo;

Lists

[ ] Tag all lists.

Tables

[ ] Format tables
[ ] Apply ditto-tags.

Table of Contents

[ ] Format table(s) of contents
[ ] Link entries in table of contents
[ ] Verify each link
[ ] Compare with generated table of contents

Images

[ ] Include all illustrations
[ ] Verify positioning of images makes sense.

Spelling

[ ] Verify generated wordlist
[ ] Tag language usage

Tools

[ ] Verify Gutcheck
[ ] Verify jeebees

Miscellany

[ ] Check for [Greek: ...] notation
[ ] Curlify quotes
[ ] Check for wrong quotes
[ ] Disambiguate single quotes, apostrophes, and primes.
[ ] Unwrap lines
[ ] Check for lines not unwrapped
[ ] Verify sequence of page-numbers
[ ] Handle fractions, such as 1/2.
[ ] Converted all fragments in uppercase to mixed case.

Text Version

[ ] Remove FIGURE notations
[ ] Verify empty lines between chapter headings
[ ] Verify empty lines around poetry and lists
[ ] Center poetry
[ ] Format title page
[ ] Remove Ads
[ ] Format Tables
[ ] Verify Greek and other transliterations

Additional Checks and Edits (Add as needed for a specific book)

[ ] ....

Post-Posting

[ ] Update status to 1.0 (i.e. Posted).
[ ] Include PG number and posting date in metadata

-->
